Chapter 1 


FLIGHT 
PREPARATIONS 


Air combat is the excitement fighter pilots live for. But behind every 
white-knuckle second in the cockpit are hours of careful preparation. 


Choose Activity Screen 


The Choose Activity Screen acts as a “main menu” for the rest of the game. 
Each of the options on the Choose Activity Screen are discussed below. 


Choose Activity Menu Bar 


The Choose Activity Menu Bar gives you access to the Graphics Prefs and 
Sound/Music Prefs control panels. Options on these control panels are 
described in the Install Guide. 


Selecting Onscreen Options 


You can select items on the screen using your mouse. Simply point at the 
option you want to select and click the left mouse button. Many of the flight 
preparation screens share features such as buttons and switches. These are 
described below. 


Menu Bar 


All flight preparation screens have pull-down Menu Bars along the top edge of 
the screen. To access a Menu Bar options, move the mouse cursor to a menu 
and hold down the left mouse button. When the options appear, drag the 
highlighted bar down to the option you want and release the mouse button. 


Buttons 


Buttons are another method for 
choosing options. 


Those buttons identified by a blue hash mark allow you to confirm a choice 
and proceed to the next screen. The keyboard equivalent for these buttons is 
Enter. 


Green buttons with the word “Cancel” on them allow you to return to the 
previous screen or the Choose Activity Screen. The keyboard equivalent for 
these buttons is Esc. 


Text Buttons 


Text buttons provide multiple options within the given context. Clicking on a 
text button cycles through different options. The left mouse button goes 
forward through the options; the right mouse button goes in reverse. 


Switches and Dials 


Switches and dials perform multiple functions depending upon what part of the 
switch or dial you click on. Text written next to switches and dials indicate 
what each particular position does. 


Objects You Can Drag 


Objects you can drag — such as map objects and weapons — can be moved 
from one part of the screen to another. Click on the desired object select it, 
and then use the mouse to drag it to the desired position. 


The ? Menu 


The ? Menu is available on every menu bar in the game. In the preparation 
screens, the ? Menu contains a single option, Quit to DOS (Ctrl-C). In the 
cockpit, the ? Menu contains an additional End Mission (Ctrl-Q) option. 


Play Single Mission 


The Play Single Mission option allows you to undertake a single, unique 
mission — either one of the many provided with the game, or one that you or a 
friend has custom-designed using the Pro Mission Creator. 


To play a single mission: 


1. 
From the Choose Activity Screen, select Play Single Mission. The Fly 
Single Mission Screen appears. 


2. 
Clicking on the Page Switch allows you to view the available single 
missions. When you see a mission you want to fly, click on the Mission 
Box to move the yellow highlight to that mission. 


3. 
Click on the Ok button or press Enter to select the mission. Depending 


on how the mission was set up, you may see one or more of the following 
screens: Mission Brief, Mission Map, Aircraft Selection, or Load 
Ordnance. Each of these screens is covered in this chapter under Start 
New Campaign. 


Create Quick Mission 


The Quick Mission Creator allows you to set up an air combat engagement 
quickly and painlessly. You specify general design parameters and the Quick 
Mission Creator delegates most design tasks to the computer. Quick 
Missions, therefore, retain the element of surprise, making excellent training 
missions. 


To create a Quick Mission: 


1. 
From the Choose Activity Screen, select Create Quick Mission. The 
Quick Mission Creator appears. 


2. 
Click on the text boxes to bring up selection panels that let you change 
various mission parameters for both friendly and hostile forces. These 
parameters are explained below. 


3. 
When you have set the mission parameters to your liking, click on the 
OK button or press Enter. You will be placed in the lead aircraft of the 
friendly group. All aircraft carry default weapon loads. 


Setting Up Quick Missions 


The Quick Mission Creator allows up to three friendly aircraft, three enemy 
flights, and one option ground target in a single mission. How these units 
begin the scenario and fight is determined by the parameters you specify. 


Friendly Forces 


As the name implies, friendly forces fly and fight with you. By clicking on the 
text buttons you may alter: 


Nationality 
Select the nationality for which you will fly. 
Choosing a nationality does not limit your choices 
of aircraft. 


Wing Size 
Specify the number of pilots (including yourself) in 
your group, up to a maximum of three. 


Skill Level 
Select Ace, Experienced, Average, or Novice skill 
level for your wingmen. 


Aircraft Type 
Choose the type of aircraft your forces will fly 
during this mission. All friendly aircraft will fly this 
same aircraft type. You may only choose one of 
the six aircraft available to players: the F-14, 
F/A-18, F-22, F-104, A-7, or Su-33. 


Altitude 
Specify the starting altitude of the group: from 
5,000 to 40,000 feet. 


Weather/Time of 
Day 
Set the weather or time of day: Dawn, Clear, 
Cloudy, Overcast, Foggy, Sunset, or Night. 


Situation 
Specify the situation your friendly forces are in. 
Friendly forces can hold the Advantage, be in a 
Neutral situation, or be at a Disadvantage. 


Separation 
Set the initial separation between friendly and 
hostile forces: from 1 to 50 nm. 


Combat Scope 
Select which weapons will be used: Guns Only or 
Guns and Missiles. Note that guns only means no 
air-to-air missiles. Air-to-air ground missiles are 
still allowed so you can attack a ground target if 
you’ve specified one. 


Hostile Forces 


For hostile forces, you may alter the following: 


Nationality 
Specify which country enemy forces come from. 
This is merely for designation purposes and does 
not limit enemy aircraft to any certain nationality. 


Wing Size 
You may add up to three enemy groups, each 
with up to 5 aircraft. Select 0 to disable a 
particular group. 


Skill Level 
Choose from Ace, Experienced, Average, or 
Novice for the specified group. Select Ace, 
Experienced, Average, or Novice skill level for your 
wingmen. As with the friendly forces, the skill level 
indicates the range of skill levels in the given 
group. The exact skill level per pilot is chosen 
randomly by the Quick Mission Generator. 


Aircraft Type 
Choose the type of aircraft used by the specified 
group. 


Ground Target 
You may select a ground target for your forces. 
Additionally, you can determine how heavily 
SAMs and AAA defend the target. 


Create Pro Mission 


The Pro Mission Creator allows you to set up complex missions involving 
multiple wings, multiple ground targets, air defenses — even a campaign of 
your own. 


The Pro Mission Creator is a complex tool requiring a detailed explanation. 
See Chapter 7: Creating Custom Missions. 


Replay Last Mission 


The Replay Last Mission option allows you to do just that: repeat the last 
played mission. This option assumes that you haven’t quit out of U.S. Navy 
Fighters since your last mission. 


Start New Campaign 


Campaign Mode is the heart of U.S. Navy Fighters. All of your training has 
prepared you for this moment. Trouble brews in the distant parts of the world, 
and you’ve been called upon to protect U.S. interests. 


Select Campaign Screen 


From the Choose Activity Screen, select Start New Campaign. The Select 
Campaign Screen appears. 


The original U.S. Navy Fighters comes with one 50 mission campaign: Ukraine 
1997. Since this option is already highlighted, clicthe OK button or press 
Enter. 


Select Pilot Screen 


The Select Pilot Screen does more than let you choose your alter-ego in the 
campaign. A pilot is in essence a saved game. Creating a new pilot is 
equivalent to starting a new campaign. Likewise, choosing a pre-existing pilot 
is equivalent to continuing his campaign. 


Use the Page Up and Page Down keys to flip through the clipboard pages, 
which allow you to alter your aircraft’s nose and tail art as well as view any 
campaign medals you may have earned. 


Click on any of the following onscreen options to alter a pilot file: 


Pilot Switch 
You can create multiple pilots, each active in a 
separate campaign. Use this switch to select the 
desired pilot. 


New Pilot 
Create an entirely new pilot. The pilot begins with 
the ranof Lieutenant and no awards or 
commendations. 


Delete Pilot 
Delete the currently selected pilot. 


Copy Pilot 
Create a backup copy of your pilot. If your pilot is 
killed or captured, you may resume his career 
from the last backup. 


Name 
Specify your pilot’s full name. 


Callsign 
Specify your pilot’s callsign. 


Squadron 
Choose your pilot’s squadron. Squadron choice 
determines what emblems are displayed on your 
aircraft. 


Prev Pic 
View the previous picture. You choose the face of 
your pilot. 


Next Pic 
View the next picture. 


Nose Art 
You may add customized artwork to the nose of 
your aircraft. 


Tail Art 
You may add customized artworto the tail of your 
aircraft. 


When you’ve created the pilot you want, clicthe Select button or press Enter. 


Video Briefings 


You typically fly two missions a day. At the beginning of each day you receive 
a short briefing from the intelligence officer. Before each mission you receive 
an additional mission briefing from your CO. You can skip any individual 
briefing by pressing spacebar. If you want to skip all of the briefings before 
any given mission, press Esc. 


Mission Brief Screen 


The Mission Brief Screen allows you to read the background and objectives of 
each mission in the campaign. 


Click on the Page switch or use the Page Up and Page Down keys to flip 
through the clipboard pages. Once you feel like you’ve got a handle on the 
situation, click on the OK button or press Enter. 


Mission Brief Menu Bar 


Campaign Menu 


Option 
Description 


Replay This 
Mission 
Go bacto the beginning of the mission so you can 
view the videos again. 


Exit Campaign 
Return to the Choose Activity Screen. 


Mission Map Screen 


The Mission Map Screen lets you plan your waypoints according to the 
mission 


objectives. 


Editing Waypoints 


You can edit waypoints in the mission for your wing only. Your superiors 
designate the waypoints for other aircraft in the mission — these cannot be 
altered. 


Click on a waypoint to select it. 


Waypoint settings appear in the Object Details panel. Click on the text 
buttons to change the following settings: 


Setting 
Options 
Description 


Waypoint 
Brings up a selection panel that lets 
you name the waypoint (Ingress, 
Merge, Strike, Feet Wet, etc.) 


Formation 
Echelon, 
Line 
abreast, 
Line 
astern 


See Waypoint Formation for wing 
formations, spacing, and stacking. 


Spacing 
Far, 
Near 
See Waypoint Formation for wing 
formations, spacing, and stacking. 


Stacking 
High, 
Level, 
Low 


See Waypoint Formation for wing 
formations, spacing, and stacking. 


Control 
Tight, 
Loose, 
Medium 


See Wingman Commands for control 
setting descriptions 


Speed 
0 
- 
3,000 
kts 


How fast your wing should travel to the 
waypoint. Note that setting a speed 
(for example, 3,000 kts) does not 
guarantee that your particular airplane 
is capable of that speed at the given 
altitude. 


Altitude 
0 
- 
80,000 
ft 


The altitude at which your wing should 
travel to the waypoint. Note that setting 
an altitude (for example, 80,000 ft) 
does not guarantee that your airplane 
is capable of attaining that altitude. 


Mission 
Normal 
Flight 
MIGCAP 
BARCAP 
Wild 
Weasel 
CAS 
Anti-Ship 
Hi/Lo 
Sweep 


See Saving Custom Missions7_1_9 for 
Objective descriptions. 


Target 
Variable 
The enemy target you’re meant to 
destroy or the friendly object you’re 
supposed to protect. Click on the text 
button, and then click on the enemy 
target or friendly object. If no specific 
target is assigned, no assigned target 
appears here. 


Reactions 
Attack, 
Defend, 
Ignore, 
Evade 


The reaction of aircraft in your wing to 
various types of enemy objects. These 
represent your wingmen’s default 
orders only — any orders you give 
them during the mission replace these 
orders. 


Search Range 
Various 
The range within which your wingmen 
will search for enemies. Note that your 
wingmen are still limited by the type of 
detection they are using. 


Force 
Equal, 
Double, 
Maximum 


No effect on your wing. 


Mission Map Menu Bar 


The Mission Map Menu Bar gives you control over waypoints and your view of 
the map. 


View Menu 


Option 
Key 
Equivalent 
Description 


Scroll left 
cursor 
left 
Scroll map view left. 


Scroll right 
cursor 
right 
Scroll map view right. 


Scroll up 
cursor 
up 
Scroll map view up. 


Scroll down 
cursor 
down 
Scroll map view down. 


Center map at 
cursor 
N 
Center the map display on the current 
cursor position. 


Center map at 
selection 
B 
Center the map display on the 
currently selected object. 


Zoom in 
plus 
(+) 
Zoom in on map. 


Zoom out 
minus 
(-) 
Zoom out on map. 


Smart zoom 
When activated, you zoom in and out 
on the currently selected object. If no 
object has been selected, you zoom in 
and out on the center of the map. 


Waypoint Menu 


Option 
Key 
Equivalent 
Description 


Add 
A 
Add a waypoint for a selected aircraft, 
wing, ship, or vehicle. The object must 
be selected before you can assign it a 
waypoint. 


Delete 
D 
Delete a waypoint for a selected 
aircraft, wing, ship, or vehicle. The 
waypoint must be selected before you 
can delete it. 


Create loop 
C 
Create a loop between two waypoints. 
Select the beginning waypoint, select 
Create loop, and then click on the end 
waypoint. The aircraft will travel from 
the initial waypoint, along any 
intermediary waypoints, until it 
reaches the end waypoint. It will repeat 
this process indefinitely. 


Delete loop 
E 
Deletes a loop between two waypoints. 
Select the end waypoint, and then 
select Delete loop. 


Select prev 
waypoint 
[ 
Select the previous waypoint for the 
selected object. 


Select next 
waypoint 
] 
Select the next waypoint for the 
selected object. 


Show Menu 


Planes, SAM 
sites, etc. 
The Show Menu controls what classes 
of objects are currently displayed on 
the map. Complex missions may 
require “decluttering” the screen by 
disabling some frequently-appearing 
units, such as AAA and SAM sites. 
This menu allows you to hide classes 
of objects while viewing a mission. 


When a checmarappears next to an 
object class, objects from that class 
are displayed on the map. To hide a 
class, select it from the menu; the 
checmardisappears and objects from 
that class are no longer shown on the 
map. The units still exist in their proper 


positions, they’re simply not 
displayed. 


Mission Map Menu Bar 


Campaign Menu 


Option 
Description 


Replay This Mission 
Go bacto the beginning of the 
mission to view briefings again. 


Exit Campaign 
Return to the Choose Activity 
Screen. 


Aircraft Selection Screen 


The Aircraft Selection Screen shows all of the aircraft available to you for the 
rest of the campaign. This is where you decide which aircraft you’ll take up on 
the mission. 


There are a few considerations involved in selecting an airplane. Suitability to 
the mission is your primary consideration. Here knowledge of the aircraft 
available to you is invaluable. For example, it wouldn’t be wise to undertake a 
strike mission in a F-14B, which lacks strike capabilities. Likewise, don’t rely 
on the A-7E to be a good interceptor — it lacks speed and maneuverability. 
Choose the right airplane for the right job. 


Your second consideration is damage. It’s almost inevitable that your aircraft 
will take damage in some missions. Damaged airplanes must be repaired, and 
the man-hours of mechanic’s time available to you are limited. For details on 
repairing aircraft see Repairing Aircraft. 


Click on the airplane you want to fly on the mission , and then click on the 
Arm Plane button or press Enter. 


Aircraft Selection Menu Bar 


Cheat Menu 


Option 
Description 


Allow Flying Any Plane 
Allow unlimited airplanes for the 
campaign, including the F-22, 
which normally doesn’t appear 
until Mission 40. As a bonus, 
you can also fly the F-104, which 
would not appear on a carrier in 
real life. 


Campaign Menu 


Option 
Description 


Replay This Mission 
Go bacto the beginning of the 
mission so you can hear the 
videos again. 


Exit Campaign 
Return to the Choose Activity 
Screen. 


Load Ordnance Screen 


The Load Ordnance Screen allows you to designate the number and types of 
weapons your aircraft will carry in the mission. Your airplane’s hardpoints 
appear on the right, while available weapons appear on the left. 


Loading & Unloading Weapons 


Use your mouse to choose weapon types (Air-to-Air or Air-to-Surface) by 


clicking on the red lights next to the Weapon Type dial. 


To load weapons or extra fuel tanks onto hardpoints, move the mouse cursor 
over a weapon, hold down the mouse button, and drag the weapon to the 
hardpoint. 


To unload specific weapons from your hardpoints, move the mouse cursor over 
a weapon, hold down the mouse button, and drag the weapon bacover to the 
weapon list. You can also select Unload All from the Weapons Menu to clear 
all ordnance from your aircraft. 


Weapon loads on aircraft must be balanced — that is, the weight distribution 
on the wings and fuselage must be equal. Your weapon load is automatically 
balanced for you as you choose weapons. 


If you need to adjust the fully loaded weight of your airplane, you can left-click 
on hardpoints to increase weapons or right-clicto decrease weapons. Once 
you’ve loaded the ordnance you want on the mission, click on the Fly button or 
press Enter. 


Loading & Unloading Gun Rounds 


To unload gun rounds, clicthe right mouse button on the gun icon. To reload 
gun rounds, clicthe left mouse button on the gun icon. 


Adding & Removing Fuel 


The current takeoff weight (in the Vehicle Weight box) is the combined weight 
of your airplane, weapons, and fuel. You may need to reduce your internal fuel 
to accomodate more weapons or, eliminate weapons to increase your fuel for 
long-range missions. For example, the Su-33 has a massive internal fuel tank, 
giving it exceptional range; however, at 100% fuel it can barely carry a few 
missiles. To remove fuel from your internal fuel tank, move the mouse cursor 
to the Internal Fuel Switch and left-click on the minus (-) end. To add fuel, 
left-click on the plus (+) end of the switch. 


Note that you must keep your weight under the maximum takeoff weight or 
you won’t be able to fly. 


Load Ordnance Menu Bar 


Weapons Menu 


Option 
Description 


Unload All 
Unload all weapons from your 
aircraft. Your internal gun 
remains fixed, though it now 
carries no rounds. Your internal 
fuel supply remains unchanged. 


Cheat (load anything anywhere) 
Gives you unlimited vehicle 
weight, allowing you to load as 
many weapons as you like onto 
your hardpoints. Note that the 
number of hardpoint stations 
remains the same, thus limiting 
how many kinds of weapons you 
can take. 


Campaign Menu 


Option 
Description 


Replay This Mission 
Go bacto the beginning of the 
mission so you can hear the 
videos again. 


Exit Campaign 
Return to the Choose Activity 
Screen. 


Ending the Mission 


You can end a mission by selecting End Mission (Ctrl-Q) from the ? Menu or 
by exiting to DOS (Ctrl-C). 


In order for the mission to end successfully, you must achieve all of your 
mission objectives and get within 8 nm of the carrier. A radio message — 
“We’re almost home!” — lets you know when you’re in the carrier’s protective 
zone. 


If you don’t achieve your mission objectives but make it bacto the carrier, you 
fail your mission. If you end the mission before you make it bacto the carrier’s 
protective zone, you fail the mission and lose an airplane. 


Ejecting is another way to end the mission, and it’s a risky one at that. 
Whenever you bail out, you lose that airplane from your inventory. If you’re over 
enemy territory, you also run a risof being captured by enemy forces. This 
ends the campaign immediately. If you’re rescued, you continue the campaign 
minus the aircraft you lost. 


Repairing Aircraft 


After each mission, the Aircraft Repair Screen appears. This screen allows 
you to make repairs to the limited number of airplane’s available to you in 
Campaign Mode. 


Anytime an aircraft is hit by enemy weapons, it takes damage. Aircraft require 
a high degree of maintainance — even the stress of normal flight will result in a 
small fraction of miscellaneous damage to your airplane. 


Damage is measured in terms of percentages. At 100% damage, your airplane 
is guaranteed the loss of one or more critical systems: oil lines, fuel tank, 
radar, weapons, control surfaces, etc. Your airplane can take damage beyond 
100%, but it won’t be capable of flying again until its damage is repaired to 
under 100%. 


You are allotted 50 man-hours of repair after each mission. You don’t 
necessarily have to repair the airplane you just flew — you can choose to 
spend these hours on any damaged aircraft on the deck. Note, however, that 
hours are not cumulative; that is, you cannot save them from mission to 
mission. If possible, spend all of the hours available repairing aircraft, because 
they won’t be available to you on the next mission. 


If an aircraft takes damage, you’ll notice yellow mules surrounding it. The more 
mules, the more damage the aircraft has taken. You can view the exact 
amount of damage on any of your airplanes simply by pointing the mouse 
cursor at the airplane and clicking. 


To repair the damage to an airplane, click on the damage line in the selection 
panel. The man-hours needed to repair it are automatically subtracted from 
your total. 


Death, MIA, Reassignment 


There are several ways for the campaign to end permanently. Your pilot can 
die. He can bail out and get captured by the enemy. Or he can fail more than 
five missions and get reassigned to some other part of the world. 


In all of these unfortunate events, there is a way to turn bacthe hands of time 
and give your hero another chance. After flying the losing mission, a dialog 
panel will appear asking you if you want to try this mission again. If you select 
No, you’re pilot is gone forever and that campaign is over. If you select Yes, 
wait for the mission brief screen to appear. If you don’t want to replay the 
mission now, select Exit Campaign from the ? Menu. If you don’t actually 
want to replay the mission, just wait for the Mission Brief Screen to appear 
and select Exit Campaign from the ? Menu. 


Winning The Campaign 


A campaign consists of a series of missions which must be executed in order. 
As in real life, your primary goal is survival. You must survive all of the sorties 
in your tour in order to win. This means that you don’t have to repeat individual 
missions until you succeed at each one. If you fail a particular mission, its 
assumed that other pilots step in and achieve your mission objective for you. 


Keep in mind that the Brass doesn’t like to re-deploy assets to cover your 
failures. While your superiors understand the formidable challenges you face, 
they expect maximum performance from you. If you fail more than four 
missions, you will be assigned a different tasfar away from the carrier. The war 
will be over for you. 


Resource Management 


You begin the campaign with a limited number of aircraft of fighter aircraft. 


What you see on the decis what you get, except that you have an unlimited 
number of A-7E attack aircraft. In addition to your initial aircraft, you receive 
one F-22 after completing Mission 39. 


The goal is to complete the campaign with a limited number of aircraft and 
missiles. Lose all of your best aircraft in the beginning missions and you may 
find yourself in trouble down the line. Waste all of your expensive, high-tech 
missiles too soon and you may not have enough to hit critical targets later on. 


Continue Old Campaign 


Campaigns are saved under the names of pilots. The Continue Old 
Campaign option brings you to the Select Pilot Screen. Select the pilot 
associated with the saved campaign you want to play. 


For more details, see Select Pilot Screen under Start New Campaign in this 
chapter. 


Configure Hardware 


The Configure Hardware option allows you to change the current game 
configuration. Consult the Install Guide for more details on configuring the 
game. 


See Vehicle Info 


The See Vehicle Info option lets you view all of the aircraft, ships, ground 
vehicles, and objects in U.S. Navy Fighters. 


Click on the onscreen options to manipulate your view or to looat another 
object. 


Use the Page Up and Page Down keys to flip through the text describing the 
object. When you are finished looking at vehicles, click on the Exit option or 
press Esc. 


Vehicles Menu 


Use the Vehicles Menu to change the class of vehicles you’re viewing. 


View Pilot Records 


The View Pilot Records option lets you view all of the active and inactive 
pilots. 


Use the Page Up and Page Down keys to flip through the clipboard pages, 
which allow you to view your aircraft’s nose and tail art as well as any 
campaign medals the pilot may have earned. 


Pilot Switch 
Clicswitch to view your pilots. 


Delete Pilot 
Delete the pilot you’re currently 
viewing. 


Copy Pilot 
Create a backup copy of your 
pilot. If your pilot is killed or 
captured, you may resume his 
career from the last backup. 


When you’re finished viewing your pilots, press Oor press Enter to return to 
the Choose Activity Screen. 


Chapter 2 


COCKPIT FAMILIARIZATION 


Cockpit Elements 


While flying, your immediate environment consists of a cockpit display, the 
Head Up Display or HUD, and a number of instrument windows that you can 
activate. 


The Cockpit Display 


You can display the cockpit for added realism or hide it in order to increase 
your view of the world outside. Press Backspace to turn the cockpit on or off. 


The Head Up Display 


The Head Up Display, or HUD, is a transparent sheet before the glareshield 
upon which critical information is projected. The HUD reduces the need to look 
at other instruments in the cockpit, thus allowing the pilot to concentrate on 
the combat situation. 


Information Windows 


Information Windows let you display important instruments, views, and 
information in the corners of your screen. You choose which windows are 
displayed, depending on the nature of the task. 


HUD Flight Information 


Basic flight information is displayed whenever the HUD is active. Each 
airplane’s HUD has slightly different symbology. For example, altitude might 
be displayed numerically, or with a “tape,” or both. 


Above Ground Level Indicator 


As you fly over land, ground level changes. The AGL indicates your relative 
proximity to the ground below your aircraft. For example, when flying over a 
mountain, you could be 5,000 feet above sea level but only 200 feet above the 
ground. 


Pay particular attention to the AGL when flying in clouds or fog. 


Airspeed 


The airspeed tape scrolls up and down, indicating changes in airspeed. Your 
current airspeed is displayed numerically at the center of the tape. Indicators 
show your maximum and minimum (ie, stall) speeds. 


In U.S. Navy Fighters, your airspeed indicator measures true airspeed and not 
indicated airspeed. 


Altitude 


The altitude tape scrolls up or down, indicating changes in altitude above sea 
level. Your current altitude is displayed numerically at the center of the tape. 


When the ILS is engaged, additional marks indicate your current vertical 
speed (how fast you are diving or climbing) and what the maximum vertical 
speed allowed for landing is. 


For more information on the ILS, see HUD in Navigation Mode in this chapter. 
For a detailed guide to using the ILS, see Chapter 5: Carrier Qualifications. 


Auto 


Indicates that the autopilot is engaged and steering your aircraft to the current 
waypoint. Press A to turn the autopilot on/off. 


Corner Velocity Indicator 


The corner velocity indicator shows your corner speed at your current altitude. 


If you’re flying faster than corner speed, the cue will be displayed below the 
numeric airspeed readout. If you’re flying slower than corner speed, the cue 
will be displayed above the numeric airspeed readout. When you fly at the 
indicated corner speed, you have maximum turn performance available. Above 
or below this speed, turn performance suffers. 


For more information on corner velocity, see Turn Performance in Chapter 3: 
Flight School. 


Current Weapon Indicator 


Indicates the current weapon and the number of rounds left. 


Flaps, Gear, Brakes & Hook 


The upper right hand corner of the HUD indicates the flap, gear, and brake 
status. If FLAPS, GEAR, BRAKE, or HOOK appears in the upper right corner, 
then the specified device is extended. If the word does not appear here, the 
device is retracted. 


Flight Path Indicator 


The Flight Path Indicator shows which direction the aircraft is actually moving, 
regardless of flight attitude. When Angle of Attack (AOA) is positive, the Flight 
Path Indicator is below the HUD’s center. When the AOA is negative, the 
Flight Path Indicator is above the HUD’s center. 


For more information on Angle of Attack, see Chapter 3: Flight School. 


G-Meter 


The G-meter shows how much G the aircraft is currently pulling. For more 
information on role of G-Force in maneuvering, see Chapter 3: Flight School. 


Heading 


The heading tape is your compass. It scrolls right and left, indicating changes 
in your heading. Your current heading is displayed numerically at the center of 
the tape. 


Pitch Ladder 


The pitch ladder indicates the aircraft’s pitch and roll relative to the horizon. 


The center of the HUD always represents where the nose of your aircraft is 
pointing. Each pitch ladder line represents 5 degrees above or below the 
horizon. Positive pitch lines — indicating that the nose is pointed above the 
horizon — are solid. Negative pitch lines — indicating that the nose is pointed 
below the horizon — are represented by dashed lines. The ends of the pitch 
lines always point toward the horizon. 


The pitch ladder lines also represent your aircraft’s roll. Think of them as 
representing your wings: when the lines are horizontal, your wings are parallel 
to the horizon. When the lines are vertical, you wings are at a right angle to 
the horizon. 


Thrust Indicator 


The thrust indicator shows the engine’s current throttle setting as a 
percentage of maximum engine output. AFT indicates that afterburners have 
been lit. 


Time Compression Level 


Rate of time compression appears in the upper right corner when time 
compression has been activated. During time compression, your stick inputs 
are reduced so your airplane is still controllable. 


Waypoint Indicator 


The waypoint indicator moves along the underside of the heading display 
showing the direction to the selected waypoint. When the indicator is centered 
under the heading readout, you are flying directly at the next waypoint. 


For more information on waypoint navigation, see The HUD in Navigation Mode 
in this chapter. 


The HUD In Weapons Mode 


Weapons Mode provides you with targeting symbology needed to designate 
and engage targets. 


Aspect Indicator 


Indicates a targeted aircraft’s aspect angle in degrees. The aspect angle 
measures the angle between the target’s nose and your airplane. When the 
target is at 180 degrees, it’s facing you. 90L means that the target’s left wing 
is facing you; 90R means you’re looking at the right wing. When a ground 
target or ship is targeted, the aspect indicator reads XXXX. 


This is the numeric equivalent of the aspect angle indicator in the center of the 
HUD (see HUD Flight Information above). 


Closure 


Appears beneath the range indicator showing the target’s speed relative to 
yours. A positive closure means the target is approaching you, a negative 
closure means it is moving away. 


Hit Probability 


Shows the weapon’s current hit probability. The percentage takes into account 
all factors which may affect the missile’s overall chance to hit — such as 
weather — but does not consider enemy maneuvering. 


IN RNG appears next to the hit probability when the target is within the 
weapon’s minimum/maximum range. 


Note that your missile must have a lock – not just a 
minimum hit percentage – in order to have any chance 
of hitting. 


Offscreen Target Marker 


The Offscreen Target Marker shows the shortest path to your current target. In 
order to follow the shortest path, roll your airplane until the marker is at the top 
of your screen, and then pull back on the stick. As long as the marker 


remains at the top of the screen you’re following the shortest path. 


Range 


Indicates the range to the target in nautical miles (nm). 


TD Box 


The target designator box, or TD box, is superimposed on the HUD over the 
target, even if the target is outside of visual range. 


Weapon Type & Quantity 


Displays the number and type of the currently selected weapon. 


HUD in Missile Mode 


In missile mode, the HUD shows not only the missile type and number 
remaining, but information that’s useful in achieving the best launch conditions 
for the weapon. 


Aiming Reticle & Aspect Angle 


The center of the HUD displays the aiming reticle, which is the center of the 
missile seeker’s field of view. This circle remains fixed while the aspect angle 
indicator moves around it. The aspect angle indicator shows the angle 
between the target’s flight path and your line of sight to the target. 


If the aspect angle indicator is at the top of the aiming reticle, the target is 
heading directly toward you. If it’s at the bottom of the aiming reticle, the 
target is heading directly away from you. If the indicator is along either side, 
you are looking at his wing. 


For hints on using the aspect angle information to your advantage, see 
Chapter 6: Advanced Combat Techniques. 


Weapon Range Scale 


The vertical scale to the side of the aiming reticle shows your weapon’s 
minimum and maximum range. The scale range is listed at the top of the 
indicator. The target marker indicates where the current target is in the 
missile’s range. If the target is outside of the missile’s range, the target 
marker is not displayed. 


Missile Seeker 


The missile seeker is represented by a floating diamond on the HUD. When 
the missile seeker acquires the target, a flashing diamond appears in the TD 
box. This indicates the missile is tracking the target and can be fired, but 
does not indicate if you are in a good firing position. 


HUD in Guns Mode 


The HUD in guns mode shows the number of rounds left in your internal gun. 
In addition, your gunsight changes depending on whether you’re attacking with 
radar on or radar off. 


When your radar is off, the pipper is set to indicate where a bullet will fall at 
1,000 feet. If a target is beyond this distance, you need to lead the target 
more. If the target is less than 1,000 feet, you need to lead it less. 


With radar on and your target locked, the pipper changes range to match that 
of the target and automatically calculates lead requirements. For you, this 
makes life simple — just place the pipper on the target and fire. Your active 
radar also provides your gun computer with range information. As you close in 
on your target, a thick line moves along the perimeter of the pipper. This circle 
measures range from your current position to the target. When there is no 
thick arc on your pipper, your chances of hitting are zero. When the arc has 
filled in the pipper, your chances of scoring a hit with a well-aimed shot are 
excellent. 


HUD in CCIP Mode 


CCIP stands for Continuously Calculated Impact Point. The HUD in CCIP 
displays all the symbology necessary to accurately strike ground targets with 
unguided bombs. 


The dotted line extending from the center of the HUD indicates which path the 
bombs will follow upon release, and the impact point pipper shows where the 
bomb will land. In level flight, you often can’t see the pipper on your HUD; to 
see the pipper, you must either dive or significantly increase speed. The 
slower you fly, the steeper you must dive to keep the CCIP pipper on the 
screen. 


An arcing line moves inside the CCIP pipper. This circle measures range from 
your current position to the drop point. When the inner arc forms a complete 
circle the target point is 10,000 feet or more away. When the inner arc forms a 
half-circle, the target point is 5,000 feet away. Accuracy reduces as range 
increases, effectively limiting bombs to a 2 nm range. Beyond this range your 
chances of hitting the intended target are very low. 


The HUD In Navigation Mode 


Navigation Mode provides you with the information you need to fly to 
pre-established waypoints and make successful carrier landings. To switch 
between Weapons Mode and Navigation Mode, press N. 


Current Weapon 


The current weapon is always displayed in the event that you need it. 


Distance 


The distance to the current waypoint in nautical miles (nm). 


Time 


The time to the next waypoint based on your current airspeed in 
minutes:seconds 


ILS System 


The instrument landing system, or ILS, provides landing guidance. The ILS 


displays horizontal and vertical lines on the HUD which guide you to the carrier 
during landings, especially when the deck is obscured by bad weather or 
darkness. ILS lines are displayed only when you are in a landing configuration. 


The ILS automatically displays on the Navigation mode HUD under the 
following conditions: 


Gear and hook down 


Within 5nm of the carrier 


Under 2,000 feet of altitude. 


The ILS lines show where your aircraft needs to fly. The horizontal line shows 
your altitude and the vertical line shows how well you are lined up with the 
runway. The dots are tightly spaced when following a good approach and 
loosely spaced when outside approach parameters. When the dotted lines 
form a cross in the center of your HUD, you’re on the glide path for a correct 
landing. 


For more information on ILS operation and carrier landings, see Chapter 4: 
Carrier Qualifications. 


Instrument Windows 


All instruments except the HUD are displayed in user-selectable windows. 
You select only the windows you need for the current task, saving screen 
space and increasing the speed of the game by closing non-necessary 
windows. 


Flight Envelope 
Window 
Shift - 1 


The Flight Envelope Window shows your aircraft’s current state within its flight 
envelope. 


The flight envelope is basically a series of graphs showing the aircraft’s 
minimum and maximum speed and altitude and its turn performance. With the 
Flight Envelope Window, you can graphically see how your aircraft is 
performing within the following limits: 


Stall Speed 


The stall speed curve graphs the altitude and speed at which stalls occur. If 
the dot representing your aircraft moves toward the left side of the envelope, 
you need to pick up speed or a stall is imminent. 


Wing Lift Limit 


The wing lift limit curve represents the aircraft’s ceiling. The aircraft can’t climb 
above this altitude because the air is too thin — not enough lift can be 


generated to overcome the airplane’s weight. If the dot representing your 
aircraft hits this upper limit, nothing will happen; however, since you’re in your 
1g envelope, you won’t be able to do much in the way of maneuvering. 


Thrust Limit 


The thrust limit curve represents the limit of your engines at high altitude. 
Above the tropopause (36,600), your engines can’t produce enough thrust to 
go beyond certain speeds. If the dot representing your aircraft hits its thrust 
limit, nothing will happen — you simply can’t go any faster. 


Structure Limit 


The structure limit curve represents the maximum speed your airframe can 
handle. Go too far beyond this limit and your wings will tear off. If the dot 
representing your aircraft approaches this limit, think about slowing down 
immediately. 


G-Load 


Each flight envelope is defined by the number of g’s your aircraft can pull. 
G-loads measure your aircraft’s turning. This is explained in detail in Chapter 
3: Flight School, however, the window can be explained here briefly. To 
simplify, the more G’s you’re pulling, the harder you’re turning. The number of 
G’s you can pull are limited by the following factors: 


Altitude 
At higher altitude, where the air is significantly 
thinner, the wings cannot generate as much lift. As a 
result, you can pull fewer G’s at high altitude than at 
low altitude. 


Speed 
The faster you’re going, the fewer G’s you can pull. 


Structure 
An aircraft is built to endure only a certain amount of 
G-force. Beyond that range, the airplane’s structure 
is fatigued to the point that the wings crack. 


Pilot 
Humans can only tolerate a certain amount of G-force 
stress. Too many seconds of + 9g maneuvering and 
you black out. Maneuver too long at - 5g and you 
experience “red out.” 


Load 
Amount of ordnance and fuel you’re carrying. The 
more weight on your airplane, the fewer G’s you can 
pull. 


The Flight Envelope Window is useful for quickly seeing the number of g’s 
available to you at any time. If you get involved in a turning fight with an 
opponent, you typically want maximum g’s in order to out-turn your opponent. 
Depending on the combat situation, you may want to be in the smallest 
(highest G) envelope in the window. When used with the Corner Speed 
Indicator on the HUD, you can determine what speed will give you the best 
turn performance and what you need to do in order to achieve it. Note: The G’s 
shown in the Flight Envelope are for “clean” aircraft not loaded down by 
ordnance. Since weapons increase both weight and drag, you may not be able 
to pull the maximum G shown depending on your weapon load. 


For more details on corner speed, see Chapter 3: Flight School. 


Flight Envelope Window Modes 


The Flight Envelope Window has three buttons along the bottom which modify 
the flight envelope display. 


Current Curve 


Displays the the envelope for the G-load currently being experienced by your 
aircraft. For example, when flying straight and level at 450 kts and 1g, the 1g 
curve is displayed. When flying at 450kts at 3g, the 3g curve is displayed. 


All Curves 


Diplays the flight envelopes for all G-loads your aircraft is capable of. This 
mode is useful for seeing how close you are to the “next” envelope and gives 
you a clue as to how you can increase G. For example, if the dot appears on 
the far left side of the graph, you’re moving too slowly to pull much G — you 
should add thrust and/or sacrifice altitude for speed. If the dot appears near 
the top, you’re already at maximum altitude — you should decrease altitude 
quickly (via a Split S, for example). If the dot appears near the right side of the 
graph, you’re moving too fast to pull more G — you should climb or simply put 
up your brakes. 


Compare Curves 


Displays your flight envelope over that of your currently selected target, 
providing you with a quick comparison of aircraft performances.. Areas where 
the opponent holds the advantage are shaded red. 


You must have a target lock to use this display mode. For more information on 
locking a target, see Targeting Commands in Chapter 5: Fundamentals of Air 
Combat. 


Forward View Window 
Shift - 2 


Since you can’t always look ahead during a dogfight, the Forward View 
Window gives you a look at where you’re going while your head is turned. This 
compensates for the fact that in reality you can shift views more quickly than 
in a simulation. 


Other View Window 
Shift - 3 


The Other View Window lets you choose another view and display it 
throughout the mission. To set the window’s view, switch to another view (F2 - 
F12 ). Press V to set the view as your Other View. The Other View Window 
automatically appears. 


Target Window 
Shift - 4 


The Target Window lets you view your currently selected target and see data 
on its skill and activities. Note: When using TV- or laser-guided bombs, the 
view from the missile is displayed this window until the missile explodes. 


Activity 


A target’s Activity tells you what specifically he’s doing in order to complete 
his Tactical Goal. This can range from SEARCHING for other opponents to 
ACQUIRING, PURSUING, or doing one of many maneuvers. 


Bearing 


The target’s bearing is represented by hours on the clock, with 12 o’clock 
being the nose of your airplane and 6 o’clock being your tail. Hi and Lo provide 
a general idea of the target’s altitude relative to your own. 


Damage 


Damage to the target is indicated by the vertical bar on the right side of the 
window. White represents damage to the target. When the bar is completely 
black, the target has taken no damage. When the bar is completely white, the 
target is destroyed. Damaged computer opponents suffer reduced turn 
performance and reduced thrust. 


Tactical Goal 


A target’s Tactical Goal can be one of four things, represented by one of the 
following markers: 


Marker 
Goal 
Description 


A 
Attack 
Attack something other than you. 


N 
Neutral 
Follow waypoints and fulfill mission. 


E 
Evade 
Evade something other than you. 


A 
Attack Player 
Attack you specifically. 


E 
Evade Player 
Evade you specifically. 


C 
Crash 
Die screaming. 


Range 


The distance of the target from you, measured in nautical miles (nm). 


Skill 


The pilot’s skill is shown by dots in the following manner: 


# of Dots 
Skill 
Description 


None 
Novice 
An easy target. Don’t expect 
fancy maneuvers from this guy. 


One 
Average 
Hard to tell if this guy’s a 
turkey or an eagle. 



Two 
Experienced 
Don’t expect an easy fight. 
This guy’s got some cards up 
his sleeve. 


Three 
Ace 
A pro. He’ll turn and burn with 
you until one of you earns 
yourself a nylon letdown. 


Type 


Displays the type of target you’re facing. 


RWR Window 
Shift - 5 


The Radar Warning Receiver (RWR) Window displays all active radar sources 
around your aircraft. 


The center represents your aircraft, with the top of the display indicating 
what’s in front of you and the bottom of the display indicating what’s behind 
you. All received radar sources appear as a green dot around your aircraft, 
relative to your current position. The selected range is displayed in nautical 
miles in the upper right corner. 


When a radar source is detected a small “R” is displayed in the lower right 
corner of the RWR. A bright “R” indicates that the aircraft has a lock on you 
and may fire on you soon. If the “R” begins to flash, a missile is currently 
locked on you and in flight. Your RWR also gives you other information not 
available in the real world: it can detect infrared seekers, indicated by a small 
“I” in the lower right corner. The “I” functions identically to the “R” — a bright “I” 
means an IR-homer is locked on you, and a flashing “I” means a missile is 
headed for you. 


Missiles appear on the RWR as smaller dots. Rapid flashing indicates the 
missile is actively tracking you. Your missiles will also appear on the RWR, 
so pay attention. Lastly, the RWR shows the status of your jamming 
equipment, displaying “JAM” when your ECM gear is activated. 


Changing RWR Range 


Press period (.) to increase RWR range. Press comma (,) to decrease RWR 
range. Maximum RWR on any aircraft in U.S. Navy Fighters is 50 nm. 


NAV Window 
Shift - 6 


The NAV Window shows bearing and range to waypoints along with the 
estimated time of arrival (ETA) in minutes:seconds. The currently selected 
waypoint is always highlighted. 


Waypoints must be manually selected except when the autopilot is in 
operation. Press W to switch to the next waypoint, or press Shift-W to go to 
the last waypoint. Alternately, you can change waypoints by clicking on the + 
and - buttons at the bottom of the NAV Window. 


“Bearing” is not the heading you must fly, but the number of degrees you must 
turn in order to fly directly at the waypoint. If the bearing is negative, turn left. If 


the bearing is positive, turn right. 


System Status Window 
Shift - 7 


The System Status Window displays throttle, engine temperature, oil 
pressure, and hydraulic pressure. This view is useful for assessing systems 
damage and viewing fuel levels. 


Stores Window 
Shift - 8 


The Stores Window displays the number and type of weapons the aircraft 
currently carries and how much fuel is remaining. 


You can change your current weapon using the square bracket keys ( [ ] ). 
Alternately, you can change current weapons by clicking on the + and - 
buttons at the bottom of the Stores Window. 


Radar Window 
Shift - 9 


The Radar Window displays your radar scope (in a two-seater, that of your 
RIO). The window will appear only if your radar has been activated (press R). 
Deactivating your radar (press R again) automatically closes the radar window. 


The Radar Window is a top-down view. The nose of your aircraft is in the 
center of the bottom edge of the window. The top edge represents far edge of 
radar coverage. Contacts appear as dots on the grid. 


Your radar can detect aircraft and large surface objects such as ships. 
Interference from the ground prevents your radar from detecting tanks or small 
vehicles. To detect these targets, you need to carry either an infrared detector 
or HARM missiles, which home in on enemy radar emissions. 


TWS/RWS Indicator 


The TWS/RWS Indicator indicates whether the radar is in Range While Search 
(RWS) or Track While Scan (TWS) mode. 


Range While Search (RWS) mode uses continuous wave emissions to provide 
contact range and bearing at extremely long ranges. Primarily a scanning 
mode, RWS cannot provide detailed tracking information. You cannot target a 
contact while in RWS mode. RWS mode engages automatically when you 
increase radar range past maximum tracking range. 


Track While Scan (TWS) mode uses pulse-Doppler radar to target a 
designated contact, thereby providing detailed tracking information, while still 
providing scanning of other nearby contacts. TWS mode automatically 
disengages when you increase radar range past maximum tracking range. 


Aircraft 
Max RWS Range 
Max TWS Range 


A-7 
150 nm 
50 nm 


F-104 
150 nm 
25 nm 


F-14 
150 nm 
150 nm 


F/A-18 
150 nm 
50 nm 


F-22 
150 nm 
150 nm 


Su-33 
150 nm 
100 nm 


Radar Contacts 


Contacts appear as dots on this grid based on their range from your aircraft. 
For example, with a 100 nm range selected a contact at 50 nm would appear 
in the middle of the display, a contact at 75 nm would appear near the top, 
and a contact at 10 nm would appear near the bottom. If you decrease range 
to 50 nm, the 75 nm contact disappears and the others both move closer to 
the top of the display. 


At long range, radar may be unable to distinguish between multiple targets 
flying closely together. A tight formation of two MiG-29s at 100 nm may 
appear as a single dot on your radar until you get much closer. Beware of 
single contacts: they may unexpectedly multiply! 


Aircraft appear as small squares. In TWS mode, a small “tail” on the target 
indicates the contact’s heading relative to your heading. When a contact is 
targeted, two vertical lines, called “captain’s bars,” surround the designated 
contact. Surface targets appear as single-pixel dots. 


Target Elevation & Azimuth 


Two arrows move along the left and bottom edges of the radar window. The 
arrow along the left edge shows the target’s altitude relative to your own. If the 
target is beneath the plane of your nose, the elevation indicator moves below 
center. If the target is above the plane of your nose, the elevation indicator 
moves above center. The bottom arrow indicates target azimuth, or horizontal 
displacement. If the target is left of your nose, the azimuth indicator moves left 
of center and vice versa. 


Increasing/Decreasing Radar Range 


Press period (.) to increase radar range. Press comma (,) to decrease radar 
range. Maximum RWS and TWS ranges are listed above. 


Historical Mode 


Press Y to activate your radar system’s historical mode. This displays a 
series of dots behind a contact giving a visual representation of the contact’s 
movement over time. Alternately, you can click on the Y button on the Radar 
Window. 


IR Mode/HARM Mode 


The Radar Window is also used for aircraft carrying infrared sensors or HARM 
missiles. 


Airplanes equipped with the AAS-38 FLIR IR-sensor can detect target objects 
based on their infrared signatures. The IR-sensor has two advantages — it 
allows you to detect ground targets, and enemies are not aware that you’ve 
targeted them. Unfortunately, it’s less effective in bad weather than radar, and 


it’s short range limits you to close engagements. 


Note that the SU-33, SU-27, and MiG-29 all have built-in IR sensors. 


Press I to turn off your radar and activate the IR-sensor, or click on the “M” 
button on the Radar Window. You designate targets with the IR-sensor 
exactly as you would with your active radar. If you want to return to active 
radar mode, press R. 


If your aircraft is carrying HARM missiles, press M to turn off your radar and 
turn on the radar-homing seeker used by the missile. The HARM missile is 
deadly against enemies employing radar. You designate targets for the 
radar-homer as you normally would for your active radar. If you want to return 
to active radar mode, press R. For more information on IR and HARM modes, 
see Chapter 5: The Fundamentals of Air Combat. 


Authentic vs. Standard Radar CRT 


The Standard Radar CRT is a top down view of what’s in front of your airplane. 


Authentic Radar mode works differently. It’s basically a graph with vertical 
lines indicating angles off your airplane’s nose and horizontal lines indicating 
range. 


To figure out where a contact is, you must count over horizontally to its 
approximate angle off your nose, and then go up to determine range. Contacts 
are also displayed differently on the Authentic Radar CRT. The “tail” indicating 
the contact’s flight path is relative to its angle off your nose. For example, a 
contact with its flight path “tail” pointing down is actually headed directly for 
you. 


View Controls 


Lose Sight, Lose The Fight - Motto, US Navy Fighter Weapons School 


The fanciest flying in the world will still get you killed if you don’t know where 
the bandit is. Keeping visual contact, or tally, on the bandit is arguably the 
most critical aspect of aerial combat. 


Fixed Views 


Key 
View 
Description 


F1 
Forward 
Look ahead. This is your 
normal view — when in 
doubt, press F1. 


F2 
Back 
Look over your tail at 
what’s behind you. This 
is your “check six” key. 


F3 
Up 
Look above the standard 
F1 view. This is useful in 
a turning dogfight. 


Tracking View 


Key 
View 
Description 


F4 
Tracking 
This view follows the 
current target within the 
bounds of normal head 
rotation. 


External Views: Player Referenced 


Key 
View 
Description 


F5 
Player -> 
Threat 
External view of your 
aircraft, facing any 
inbound missiles. 


F6 
Player -> 
Wing 
External view of your 
aircraft, facing your 
wingman. 


F7 
Player -> 
Target 
External view of your 
aircraft, facing your 
current target. 


External Views: Other 


Key 
View 
Description 


F8 
Target -> 
Player 
External view of your 
current target, facing your 
aircraft. 



F9 
Fly By 
External view of your 


aircraft from a fixed point 
as it flies by. 


F10 
External View 
External view of your 
aircraft. 


F12 
Missile -> 
Target 
External view of your 
missile, facing its current 
target. 


View Reference Keys 


The Alt and Ctrl keys change which object your view is referenced from. 
Pressing Alt makes the current view relative to your target instead of your 
aircraft. Pressing Ctrl makes the current view relative to your last launched 
missile instead of your aircraft. 


View Panning & Zooming 


The internal views and fixed external views can be rotated or panned using the 
arrow keys. Use the cursor arrow keys (or Ctrl and the arrow key if not using a 
joystick for flight control) to change your perspective. 


Alternatively, you can pan your view by holding down Right Shift and moving 
your joystick. This command is good for looking around during combat. 


Use the plus (+) and minus (- ) keys to increase and decrease view 
magnification. 


Inflight Menu Bar 


Pressing Esc during flight activates the inflight menu bar. The inflight menu bar 
has five menus: 


Pref Menu 


Option 
Key 
Equivalent 
Description 


Stick 
Choose a control device 
for your flight stick: 
Keyboard, Joystick, or 
Thrustmaster FCS 


Rudder 
Choose a control device 
for your rudders: 
keyboard or rudder 
pedals. 


Throttle 
Choose a control device 
for your throttle: keyboard 
or throttle stick. 


Graphics... 
Shows the Graphics 
Prefs selection panel, 
which allows you to turn 


various graphic effects on 
and off. See the Install 
Guide for a complete 
discussion of the 
Graphics option. 


Sound... 
Shows the Sound/Music 
Prefs selection panel, 
which provides volume 
control for various sound 
and music effects. See 
the Install Guide for a 
complete discussion of 
the Sound option. 


HUD Pitch Ladder? 
When activated, displays 
the pitch ladder on the 
HUD. 


Dim HUD 
Shift - [ 
Reduces the brightness 
of the HUD. 


Brighten HUD 
Shift - ] 
Increases the brightness 
of the HUD. 


View Transistions? 
When activated, you see 
“transitions” when shifting 
views. If this option is not 
activated, you “snap” 
from one view to another. 


Authentic Radar CRT 
When activated, displays 
an “authentic” radar CRT 
in the Radar Window. If 
this option is not 
activated, the Standard 
Radar CRT is shown. 
See Authentic vs. 
Standard Radar CRT. 


Cockpit? 
backspace 
When activated, displays 
the cockpit. 


Rear View Windows? 
When activated, rear view 
windows in the cockpit 
let you watch your six. 
Note that your cockpit 
must be displayed in 
order to see rear view 
windows. 


Radio-Silence? 
Alt-S 
When activated, you 
don’t hear your wingman 


or RI0 chatter. They 
reserve their messages 
for the most important 
situations, such as 
missile launches. 


View Menu 


The View Menu allows you to choose from U.S. Navy Fighters’ different views. 
See View Controls. 


Window Menu 


The Window Menu allows you to choose from U.S. Navy Fighters’ different 
Instrument Windows. See Instrument Windows 


Cheat Menu 


Invulnerable? 
When activated, makes 
you invincible to enemy 
fire and crashes. 


Unlimited Ammo? 
When activated, provides 
you with unlimited 
ammo. Note that the 
types of weapons you’re 
carrying remain the same. 


Unlimited Fuel? 
When activated, provides 
you with unlimited fuel. 


Easy Aiming? 
When activated, near 
misses with your gun 
become hits. 


No Crashes? 
When activated, you can 
crash into the ground and 
live to tell about it. 



No Spins? 
When activated, your 
airplane will never go into 
a spin. 


Extra G? 
When activated, you can 
pull a few extra G’s over 
your normal limit. 


Ignore Weapon Weights? 
When 
activated, 
your airplane 
will perform 
as if it were 
carrying no 


weapons. 


No Sun Whiteout? 
When activated, you see 
no glare when staring into 
the sun. 


No Redout or Blackout? 
When activated, you do 
not suffer redouts or 
blackouts from excessive 
positive and negative 
G-loads. 


Ignore Mid-Air Collisions? 
When 
activated, you 
cannot collide 
with another 
airplane. 


Show Target Info? 
When activated, target 
info appears below 
targets on the main view. 
Target type is indicated. 
If the target is an 
airplane, its current 
maneuver appears as 
well. The information is 
orange unless the object 
is targeting you, in which 
case it appears in red. 


Air Combat Guns Only? 
When activated, all 
air-to-air missiles are 
removed from all aircraft. 


Chapter 3 


FLIGHT SCHOOL 


Piloting an aircraft requires an understanding of aerodynamics. For a fighter 
pilot this is more than just a question of safety. In combat, a firm grasp of the 
fundamental principles of flight is the difference between life and death. Air 
combat usually boils down to a fight to out-turn your opponent, point your nose 
at him, and fire weapons. Understanding how and why your aircraft turns under 
various circumstances is essential for combat success. 


Pitch, Roll & Yaw 


Aircraft maneuver in three dimensions: pitch, roll, and yaw. These dimensions 
are always referenced from the pilot’s point of view, regardless of the aircraft’s 
orientation or flight attitude. 


Pitch is the movement relative to the horizontal plane realized by the nose and 
tail moving in opposite directions (normally up and down). Pitch is controlled 
by the aircraft’s elevators. 


Roll is the movement relative to the aircraft’s longitudinal axis realized by the 
wingtips moving in opposite directions (normally up and down). Roll is 
controlled by the aircraft’s ailerons. 


Yaw is the movement relative to the vertical plane realized by the nose and tail 
moving in opposite directions (normally sideways). Yaw is controlled by the 
aircraft’s rudders. 


Flight Controls 


You control the aircraft with three primary controls, the flight stick, the rudder 
pedals, and the throttle. 


Flight Stick 


Moving the stick forward and back moves the aircraft’s elevators and causes a 
change in pitch. Pulling the stick back, called applying aft stick, causes the 
aircraft’s nose to rise. Pushing the stick forward — applying forward stick — 
causes the aircraft’s nose to lower. 


Moving the stick right and left, called applying lateral stick, controls the 
ailerons. For example, moving the stick left causes the left wing to drop and 
the right wing to rise, rolling the aircraft left. 


Rudder Pedals 


The rudder pedals move the aircraft’s rudders, controlling yaw. Applying right 
rudder yaws the aircraft’s nose right. Pushing the left rudder yaws the 
aircraft’s nose left. 


Rudder usage also induces roll. When using rudder, most aircraft will roll the 
direction rudder is applied. The amount of roll varies with aircraft type. Some 
aircraft, like the F-104, roll the opposite direction of rudder inputs. 


In U.S. Navy Fighters, flight controls are automatically coordinated, so rudder 
usage is not required for normal flight. Rudders are primarily used for lining up 
gun shots and spin recovery. 


Throttle 


The throttle controls the engine’s output. Pulling the throttle back closes the 
throttle, decreasing engine output. Rapidly closing the throttle is called cutting 
or chopping the throttle. Pushing the throttle forward opens the throttle and 
increases engine output. The engine’s maximum output without using 
afterburner is called full military power. 


The afterburner increases engine thrust even more by dumping fuel into the 
engine’s exhaust and igniting it. It provides a significant thrust increase over 
military power, but consumes fuel at a frightful rate, guzzling gas about 4 
times faster than military power. Afterburner provides a powerful boost, but 
must be reserved for critical situations. 


The Four Forces of Flight 


Flight is the result four forces acting upon the aircraft: weight, lift, drag, and 


thrust. When these four forces are properly proportioned, an aircraft becomes 
and remains airborne. You must understand how these forces interact on your 
aircraft before learning how to maneuver it. 


Weight 


Weight is the most basic of the four forces. At all times, gravity accelerates 
objects toward the planet’s surface at 32.2 feet per second squared. Weight, 
by keeping man firmly planted to the ground, prevented humankind from flying 
for centuries. 


Lift 


If weight is the most basic force, lift is the most important. The aerodynamic 
opposite of weight, lift is the upward force generated by the aircraft’s wings. 
When lift exceeds weight, the aircraft rises. When lift equals weight, the 
aircraft remains at its present altitude. When lift is less than weight, the 
aircraft descends. 


Lift is generated perpendicular to the plane of the wing. The lift vector — the 
mathematical representation depicting the direction of the wing’s lift — pushes 
up when the airplane is in level flight. When the wing rolls or rotates, so does 
the direction of the lift vector. Your lift vector forms the basis of air combat 
maneuvering. 


The movement of air over the aircraft’s wings and tailplane generate lift. 
Movable control surfaces — ailerons, rudders, and elevators — alter lift to 
rotate the airframe around its center of gravity. These are what the pilot uses 
to maneuver the airplane. 


Bernoulli’s Principle 


Bernoulli’s Principle explains the dynamics surrounding the wing. 


As the wing moves through the air, it splits the flow along its upper and lower 
edges. The curved upper surface causes the airflow to move faster over the top 
of the wing than below it. As a result, the faster-moving airflow on top of the 
wing has less pressure than the air below. Since nature abhors a vacuum, the 
air below moves upward to fill the low pressure zone, taking the wing with it. 
The result is lift. 


The amount of lift generated as the airplane moves through the air is 
determined by two things: the density of the air at it’s current altitude, and the 
speed of the wing through the air. More lift is generated as airspeed and air 
density increase. Conversely, less lift is generated as airspeed and air density 
decrease. 


The laws are easy to remember. 


The faster you go, the more lift is available. Speed is important. 


The denser the air, the greater the lift. Air is more dense near the ground and 
gets thinner the higher you go. The result: you have less lift when you’re up 
high than when you’re near the ground. 


Both of these laws are influenced by the airplane’s attitude: its Angle Of 
Attack (AOA) and its roll. 


Angle of Attack 


AOA is the angle at which the wing meets the flow of air. If an aircraft is flying 
straight and level — neither gaining or losing altitude — its wings meet the 
airflow at a low AOA. However, if the airplane pitches up, the wings meet the 
airflow at a higher angle. 


AOA is important because it causes the airflow over the top of the the wings to 
accelerate. This in turn reduces air pressure above the wing, resulting in even 
more lift. In other words, lift increases as AOA increases. 


Lift, however, does not increase indefinitely with AOA. The airplane requires a 
smooth, steady flow of air over the wing. The pilot can increase AOA to the 
point where the flow of air is disrupted. When this happens, lift decreases and 
gravity takes over — the aircraft can literally fall from of the sky. This is known 
as a stall. 


Thrust 


The wing doesn’t magically propel itself through the air. The force pushing it is 
called thrust. 


Thrust controls the direction the aircraft travels. If an aircraft suddenly pitches 
up or down, its momentum causes it to continue moving along the original 
direction until the thrust from its engines pushes it in a new direction. 


Drag 


As the saying goes, there’s no free lunch. Thrust produces an undesirable 
side effect: drag. Drag is basically resistance to air. The airplane’s engines 
must overcome air resistance in order to push the wings through the air and 
create lift. Additionally, as the airplane’s AOA increases, the surface area 
meeting the air increases, too. As a result, drag increases with speed and 
AOA. 


G-Forces 


The forces of lift and weight described above are measured in terms of “G,” 
where 1g equals the force exerted by the Earth’s gravity. 


For an aircraft to fly, its wings must generate more than 1g of lift to overcome 
the 1g of weight gravity exerts on all objects. Once airborne, the wings must 


maintain at least 1g of lift or the aircraft succumbs to gravity. 


Apparent Weight 


Angle of Attack is one factor that affects lift. What happens when the aircraft 
rolls? 


In level flight, lift and weight are perpendicular to the wing, pointing straight up 
and down. When the aircraft rolls, lift and weight remain perpendicular to the 
wing but are no longer vertical. 


For the aircraft to maintain altitude, the vertical component must equal or 
exceed the weight of the aircraft. As a result, more lift must be generated to 
maintain sufficient force to offset the 1g of gravity exerted by the Earth. 


As the figure above illustrates, 3g of actual lift must be generated to provide a 
vertical 1g of required lift. The pilot achieves this by pulling back on the flight 
stick. As he does so, he feels the increase of lift as apparent weight — in 
other words, the pilot actually feels 3 times heavier than normal. The same 
forces are at work when you’re pinned to your seat in the tight turn of a 
roller-coaster. 


As the aircraft banks even further, actual lift must be increased proportionally. 
For instance, as the aircraft approaches a 90 degree bank, actual lift must be 
increased dramatically to produce 1g of required lift. A pilot in a 90 degree 
banking turn may experience 8 or 9 times the normal force of gravity. 


The Flight Envelope 


Lift is a function of airspeed, altitude, and the aircraft’s flight attitude. All of 
these factors work together to produce flight, and all three must be considered 
together when talking about how airplanes maneuver. 


The aircraft’s flight envelope measures all three factors. A flight envelope is a 
graph showing potential airspeed, altitude, and G-load. Here is the flight 
envelope for a fictitious fighter: 


On the vertical axis is the airplane’s altitude; on the horizontal axis is the 
airplane’s speed. Plotted on the graph are curves representing G-load 
envelopes (severity of turn). 


Absolute Limits 


The outside curve shows the aircraft’s speed and altitude limits at 1g (straight 
and level flight). This curve defines the aircraft’s absolute flight parameters. The 
left edge plots the airplane’s minimum speed at various altitudes. Beyond this 
edge, the airplane isn’t going fast enough to create 1g of lift. When an airplane 
hits this edge of its envelope, it stalls. 


The top of the curve defines the aircraft’s maximum altitude. Above this 
altitude, the air is too thin (and the airplane’s wing is too small) to create 1g of 
lift. 


The right edge defines the airplane’s maximum speed at various altitudes. 
Note that the airplane depicted above can fly fastest at 36,600 ft. This altitude 
represents the atmosphere’s tropopause. Above this altitude, the air is too thin 
for the airplane’s engines to create more thrust — the airplane simply can’t go 
any faster. Below the tropopause the air is considerably thicker. Here the 
airplane’s structure limits it from going any faster. If the pilot takes the airplane 
beyond its structural limit, air resistance will weaken the airframe and the 
wings will eventually be torn off. 


G-Loading Limits 


The inner curves plot the maximum G’s (severity of turn) you can pull at 
various speeds and altitudes. You can use this information in two ways, 
depending on your reference point. 


You can look at your current point on the graph (altitude and speed) and see 
how many G’s you can potentially pull. This provides an indication of how 
tightly you can turn. 


For example, say the aircraft shown above is flying at 40,000 ft at a speed of 
700 kts. The flight envelope tells you that you could potentially pull a 
maximum of 3g’s — a very low banking turn. If the airplane were to climb to 
45,000 ft, its maximum G-load would decrease to 2g. At 49,000 ft, the airplane 
would scarcely be able to do much more than fly straight and level. 


During combat, the Flight Envelope Window can provide you with a general 
notion of the number of G’s you can pull. The darker the shade in the window, 
the fewer G’s you can pull at your current speed or altitude. 


Conversely, you can look at how many G’s you want to pull and figure out how 
to get there. For example, say you’re near the top of your aircraft’s envelope, 
where you can turn only one or two G’s. You would need to decrease altitude 
and/or speed until you’re in the deepest shade of the envelope. 


Instantaneous Turn vs. Sustained Turn 


So far you’ve seen that lift increases or decreases according to airspeed, 
altitude, and the severity of the aircraft’s maneuvering. These three factors 
interact dynamically — that is to say, they influence each other at all times. 
This is readily evident when considering two kinds of turns: instantaneous and 
sustained. 


When a pilot pulls back on the stick in order to turn, more of the airplane’s 
surface area meets air resistance. Drag increases as a result, which in turn 
slows the airplane down. The slower airspeed reduces the amount of lift 
generated. In order to maintain the turn, more thrust from the airplane’s 
engines must overcome the greater drag. 


For example, say an airplane flying at a speed of 400 kts and an altitude of 
24,000 ft is capable of pulling a 5g turn. 


The airplane banks. The increased drag exceeds available thrust and the 
aircraft slows to 350 kts. The initial 5g load is called instantaneous G. It is the 
amount of lift the airplane can initially produce at that speed. As drag slows 
the airplane, it falls into its 4g envelope. With a lower G-load, drag decreases 
slightly. The airplane slows to 325 kts, where it can only pull 3g. The drop in G 


again reduces drag. Now, drag no longer exceeds thrust and the aircraft 
maintains 325 kts at 3g. This is called sustained G. At this point, the airplane 
has reached equilibrium — it can maintain this speed and G-load. 


Putting It All Together: Turn Performance 


The number of G’s you can pull is only a general indication of how tightly you 
can turn. G’s represent the physics of your overall turn performance; however, 
geometry is also a factor. 


Turn Rate & Turn Radius 


Turn performance is measured in terms of turn rate and turn radius. Turn rate 
is number of degrees per second a particular aircraft can turn. Turn radius is 
the distance required to complete the turn. A high turn rate and a low turn 
radius yield good turn performance. 


Corner Speed 


Turn rate and turn radius depend on two variables: airspeed and lift. Both turn 
rate and radius improve as airspeed increases, but only to the point where 
maximum lift is achieved. Once an aircraft achieves maximum lift, airspeed 
has the reverse effect — it reduces turn rate and turn radius. 


The point where maximum lift occurs with the least amount of airspeed is 
known as the corner speed. Corner speed is the velocity at which the best turn 
performance is achieved— that is, the highest possible turn rate with the 
lowest possible turn radius. 


Using Corner Speed To Your Advantage 


Flying above or below corner speed reduces your aircraft’s turning 
performance. If you’re involved in a turning fight with an enemy fighter, you 
want to stick to the corner speed. If the corner speed is above your current 
airspeed, you need to increase airspeed by adding power (igniting 
afterburners) or diving. If the corner speed is below your current airspeed, you 
need to decrease airspeed by climbing. 


Keep in mind that your corner speed will only give you maximum g’s for your 
current altitude. In other words, if you’re aircraft is limited by altitude to a 
maximum 3g turn and you reach your corner velocity, you’ll only be able to 
pull 3g’s. If you want maximum turn performance against an enemy, you need 
to be at an altitude that gives you your maximum G. 


Corner speed at the current altitude is always marked on the airspeed ribbon 
by the corner velocity indicator. 


Effects of Weapon Loads 


The Flight Envelope Window depicts the performance of your airplane when 
it’s “clean,” ie, not loaded down by ordnance. Since weapons increase both 
weight and drag, airplane performance suffers when carrying weapons. As a 
general rule of thumb, you can assume that G-loading suffers in proportion to 
the extra weight carried by your airplane. If 50% of your total weight is 
ordnance, you can expect a 50% reduction in the number of G’s you can pull. 
In a bad situation you may have to reduce your weapons load to lighten your 
airplane. You can press Shift-K to jettison all air-to-ground ordnance. You may 
be unable to complete your mission, but at least you’ll come home alive. 


Fuel weight affects performance in the same manner. As your airplane 
consumes fuel during the mission, it becomes progressively lighter; however, 
you may be carrying external fuel tanks to increase your mission range. If you 
find yourself in a turning fight that isn’t going right, you can jettison your 
excess fuel by pressing Shift-J. 


Summary 


Maintain corner speed is important in a turning fight with an opponent. Keep in 
mind, however, that every aircraft has different turning capabilities. If your 
opponent’s airplane has a better turn performance than yours, you may want 
to avoid a turning fight altogether. In some instances, climbing tactics may 
prove better than turning tactics. Chapter 6: Advanced Combat Techniques 
describes general considerations when choosing the kind of fight you’re going 
to engage in. 


Chapter 4 


CARRIER QUALIFICATIONS 


Carrier operations introduce challenges not associated with land-based 
runways. Launching from and recovering to a moving, pitching surface less 
1/10 the length of most land based runways requires special training, skill, and 
abilities. These are best gained by actual practice. 


Preflight 


It’s recommended that you read the following instructions while practicing. To 
begin, load U.S. Navy Fighters and select Play Single Mission from the 
Choose Activity Menu. 


When the Mission Selection Menu appears, select Training Mission 1. Read 
the mission objectives and select a F-14B as your aircraft. When the Load 
Weapons Screen appears, unload all of your weapons so that your hardpoints 
are clear. Select Fly and you’re ready to go. 


Takeoff 


You begin on the catapult, ready to launch. Keep in mind that you can pause 
the game at any time by pressing Ctrl-P. When you’re ready to resume flight, 
press Ctrl-P again. 


Ready On The Cat 


The cat officer, visible at the right side of your view, is signaling you to 
increase power. Check the upper right corner of the HUD and verify the flaps 
are extended. Press 6 to engage afterburner. The cat officer signals 
appropriately and the catapult launches your aircraft into the air. 


After clearing the deck, quickly raise the gear by pressing G. Fly straight and 
level until airspeed reaches 200 kts, then press F to raise your flaps. Reduce 
throttle from afterburner to 100% by pressing 5. 


Navigating 


Keep the nose level and power at 100% until airspeed reaches 250 kts. Open 
the NAV Window by pressing Shift-6. This mission includes two waypoints. 
The first lies approximately 20 nautical miles due south of your carrier. Your 
navigation window should indicate the waypoint lies at least 30 nm at a 
heading of roughly 180 degrees. 


When airspeed reaches 250 kts, bank left roughly 45 degrees and pull back 
on the stick. 


Continue this left hand turn until you center the waypoint indicator under your 
heading readout. Watch the G reading in the HUD’s upper left corner carefully; 
do not exceed 3g in this turn or you risk stalling out. Pull gently back on the 
stick until the indicator reads 3g, then hold the stick at that position. When 
the waypoint indicator becomes visible, begin to level the wings slowly such 
that the wings are level just as the waypoint indicator centers under the 
heading display. The bearing in the navigation window should read zero and 
the range should be decreasing. 


Keeping the throttle at 100%, pull back on the stick until the nose pitches up 
10 degrees, and fly directly at the waypoint. When you reach 10,000 feet, 
gently push the stick forward and level the nose. When you get within 1nm of 
the waypoint, the navigation window substitutes feet for nautical miles in the 
range display. As you pass the waypoint, the bearing to the waypoint will 
change rapidly and the range increases. Fly directly at the waypoint until the 
heading suddenly changes and the range starts increasing again. You are now 
approximately 25 nm southeast of the carrier, perfectly positioned for 


practicing landings. 


Landing Practice 


Despite the rigors of combat, landing your jet on a pitching, moving aircraft 
carrier may well be the toughest task you face. Little more than a controlled 
crash, carrier pilots must land their aircraft in a box roughly 60 feet wide and 
40 feet long grabbing an arresting cable. Missing this box could mean colliding 
with aircraft or equipment parked on the deck; missing the arresting cable 
means getting your aircraft airborne quickly and trying again. Carrier landings 
require precision flying acquired only by practice, practice, and more practice. 


Approach 


A landing is only as good as the approach. A good approach usually results in 
a good landing. A bad approach results in a bad landing or even a crash. 
Executing a proper approach requires two things: 


1. 
Profile. Know where your aircraft is supposed to be and when. Know 
altitude and airspeed requirements for all critical points along the approach. 


2. 
Control. Know how to control your aircraft to meet the specified profile. A 
mandatory pre-requisite for understanding any approach profile. 


A carrier landing always requires a positive AOA while descending, meaning 
the aircraft’s nose will be pointed above where the aircraft is heading. 
Typically, you should maintain 13 to 15 degrees AOA and a constant sink rate 
of 500 to 700 feet per minute during the approach. How do you maintain this 
approach? Use this rule: use pitch to control airspeed and throttle to control 
altitude. There is no other rule or guideline as important as this. 


This may sound contrary to common sense. Throttle should control speed and 
pitch controls altitude, right? Wrong. 


During landings you use your throttle to control altitude while using pitch to 
control your speed. Let’s illustrate this through a practical example. Your F-14 
should be at about 10,000 feet and 450 kts. Set throttle to 75% by pressing 4. 
Pitch the airplane up. Pull back on the stick and raise the nose about 45 
degrees. Watch the altitude and airspeed readouts closely. Notice that your 
altitude is increasing but airspeed is dropping rapidly. As airspeed slows, so 
does your climb rate. Eventually airspeed decays too much and the aircraft 
stalls. 


Push the nose back down and watch the airspeed again increase. This 
example shows us that raising the nose, or increasing pitch, impacts airspeed 
more than it impacts altitude. The resultant changes in airspeed subsequently 
determine altitude changes. Despite the 45 degree pitch, you cannot maintain 
the climb rate without increasing throttle. 


Practicing A “Simulated” Landing 


You’re going to employ this rule to your advantage by practicing a simulated 
landing. Imagine there’s a hard deck at 5,000 ft. If you go below 5,000 feet, 
you’ve “crashed.” 


Climb to any altitude above 10,000 feet. First, let’s analyze control response . 
Reduce power to 50% by pressing 3 and extend the speed brake by pressing 
B. As speed drops, gently pull back on the stick to keep the aircraft level. 
When speed drops to 280 kts, lower the gear by pressing G and retract the 


speed brake by pressing B again. When speed drops to 225 kts, extend the 
flaps by pressing F. When airspeed reaches 180 kts, pull back on the stick 
and pull the nose up 10 degrees. Notice that airspeed drops quickly, followed 
by a loss of altitude. 


Before airspeed drops below 140 kts, increase power to full afterburner by 
pressing 6. Note that your speed stabilizes and your altitude decreases at a 
slower rate. Eventually, speed goes above 200 kts and the airplane begins to 
climb. 


Before the aircraft exceeds 300 kts, level the nose, reduce power to 50%, and 
extend the speed brake until speed drops to 225 kts. As mentioned earlier, an 
aircraft typically maintains 13 to 15 degrees AOA during a landing. You will 
now use performance information you just learned to maintain a 15 degree 
AOA during a descent. During this exercise, keep speed above 150 kts at all 


times to avoid stalling. If at any point the airspeed drops to 150, lower the nose 
immediately. 


Climb to 10,000 ft again. Set power to 25% and raise the nose 10 degrees. Do 
not adjust the throttle during this exercise. If airspeed approaches 200 kts, 
extend the speed brake. Keep speed between 150 kts and 180 kts. Hold the 
nose at 10 degrees while the aircraft descends. If speed drops to 150 kts, 
lower the nose. If airspeed increases, raise the nose until it drops. Continue to 
work the nose up and down to maintain a speed between 150 and 180kts until 
you reach the hard deck at 5,000 feet. 


If you maintain this speed, the aircraft will descend. The wings do not produce 
enough lift at that speed to keep the aircraft aloft. If you stall or spin the 
aircraft, add power, climb back to 10,000 feet, and repeat the exercise, being 
very careful to lower the nose before speed drops too low. If the aircraft tends 
to climb instead of descend, work the nose higher to control airspeed. Pull 
back farther on the stick, bringing the nose higher. Do not change throttle 
settings during this exercise. Control your airspeed throughout the descent by 
changing only pitch. 


Next, practice controlling descent with the throttle. Climb back to 10,000 feet. 
Pitch the nose up 15 degrees and reduce power to 25%. As airspeed 
decreases, the climb rate slows. Watch the HUD altimeter closely. When 
altitude begins decreasing, apply more throttle. If altitude drops more than 150 
feet, immediately apply afterburner. Do not raise the nose above 15 degrees! 
Raising the nose slows the aircraft more, increasing its descent rate even 
more. If the aircraft begins to climb, reduce power. If it climbs more than 150 
feet, reduce power to 25%. While keeping the nose at 15 degrees, continue 
working the throttle until you can maintain a steady altitude. 


When you can consistently control airspeed with pitch and altitude with 
throttle, you’re ready to try a real landing. Descend to 6,000 feet, increase 
speed to 400 kts, and head directly for the waypoint. After passing the 
waypoint, turn to a heading of 000, due North. 


Approach Profile 


The approach typically begins around 20 nm behind the carrier at the marshal 
point, a point behind the carrier designed to align returning aircraft with the 
carrier. In U.S. Navy Fighters, the next to the last waypoint is your marshal 
point. Your aircraft always receives first landing clearance; all other aircraft 
hold marshal while you land. In this exercise, the waypoint represents the 
marshal point. 


Departing Marshal 


Turn toward the carrier (in this case, heading 000), set speed to 250 kts, and 
slowly descend. Altitude should be 2,000 feet when 10 nm from the carrier. 
Level off and hold 2,000 feet until 3 nm from the carrier. At 3nm you will enter 
the traffic pattern. 


Final Approach 


When you reach heading 350, you should be approximately 2 - 3 nm from the 
carrier at 180 kts. Because the flight deck is angled 10 degrees, your final 
approach heading should always be 10 degrees left of the carrier. Since the 
carrier is currently heading 0 degrees, your final approach heading is 350 
degrees. 


At this point, there are four systems which guide your aircraft down: the 
Landing Systems Officer (LSO), the ILS, and the HUD’s flight path indicator. A 
perfect lineup is essential. Being off even a few feet can result in disaster, 
such as colliding with aircraft parked on the carrier’s deck. If the lineup isn’t 
perfect, don’t land. 


Landing Systems Officer 


The LSO guides every aircraft during the final stages of carrier landing. The 
LSO can see your aircraft better than you can see the ship and gives 
important verbal cues to perfect your lineup. Always obey the LSO. The LSO 
gives the following basic commands: 


“Go Right” 
You are too far left. Turn right slightly to improve your 
lineup. 


“Go Left” 
You are too far right. Turn left slightly to improve your 
lineup. 


“Higher” 
You are too low. Climb immediately. Increase power. 


“Lower” 
You are too high. Decrease power slightly. Also, 
pitch the nose up more. This decreases speed and 
increases your sink rate. 


“Call the Ball” 
The LSO wants you to verify you can see the 
meatball. Normally, you’d respond into the radio your 
identification, your aircraft type, the word “ball,” and 
how many pounds of fuel you have remaining. When 
the LSO hears this, he knows you can see the deck. 
If you cannot see the meatball, especially during bad 


weather, the LSO may order a wave off. 


“Go Around” or 
“Wave off” 
The LSO is ordering you not to land. Maybe your 
lineup is off, or maybe other aircraft are on the deck 
in the way. If the LSO orders wave off, apply full 
power, climb slightly, maintain current heading until 
past the carrier, then prepare for another try. 


“Bolter” 
Your tail hook did not catch any of the four arrestor 
cables. Apply full military power and gently climb 
back off the deck. Extend past the aircraft carrier and 
prepare for another try. 


ILS 


The instrument landing system appears as two lines on your HUD indicating 
how well your aircraft is aligned with the runway. The vertical bar, called the 
Localizer Deviation, indicates horizontal lineup. If you are right of the runway, 
the LD bar will be on the left side of the HUD and vice versa. The horizontal 
bar, called the Glide Slope Deviation, indicates vertical lineup. If you’re too 
high, the GSD bar appears at the HUD’s bottom and vice versa. 


Flight Path Indicator 


The HUD’s flight path indicator shows where your aircraft is actually moving. 
Keep an eye on the flight path indicator during landing. If the flight path 
indicator is short of or beneath the aircraft carrier, you’re sinking too fast and 
will crash short of the runway. If the flight path indicator is positioned past the 
arresting cables you’re coming in long and will miss the wires. 


Try to keep the flight path indicator about 13 to 15 degrees below the HUD 
centerpoint. This indicates an AOA of about 13 to 15 degrees, the proper 
approach AOA. As long as the flight path indicator is beneath the HUD center, 
you know your aircraft is sinking. 


Complications: The Moving Carrier 


The carrier continues to move during your landing. Since it’s runway is angled 
10 degrees off, the runway will always appear to be moving to your right during 
a landing. You will have to make small course corrections to remain properly 
aligned. Do not use the rudder to correct alignment! When you change 


heading with the rudder, the aircraft continues along its original course even 
though the nose has turned. If you turn the aircraft using the rudder, the nose 
will point toward the runway, but the aircraft will sideslip along its original path. 
Instead of using the rudder, turn the aircraft by rolling in the appropriate 
direction and turning toward the runway. 


In The Groove: 12 Seconds of Terror 


The final 12 seconds or so after calling the ball is known as “in the groove.” 
Your life gets very busy during these final seconds. As the Landing Systems 
Officer (LSO) gives you verbal flight instructions at this point you must control 
the aircraft’s speed and altitude using pitch and throttle, respectively to keep 
the ILS lines, the meatball, and the LSO happy. It’s not an easy job, and most 
pilots agree its as strenuous as any battle, but there’s no other place to land. 
You either bring it back aboard the boat or you swim home. 


When the ball becomes visible, make one quick scan around the cockpit. 
Verify that the arrestor hook, gear, and flaps are down 


The approach techniques you practiced earlier are critical during this phase. If 
you drift too high, cut power immediately, don’t point the nose down. The nose 
has to be pitched up at the proper AOA at touchdown so the main gear absorb 
the landing shock and the hook catches a wire. If the nose is down, the nose 
gear takes the impact and will collapse. You can lower the nose slightly to 
recover airspeed, but never lower it below zero degrees. If you sink too low, 
don’t raise the nose. Raising the nose slows the aircraft more and causes it to 
drop even faster. Apply full military power quickly, using afterburner if you’re 
very slow. Keep careful watch on your speed; stalling at this altitude will result 
in a crash. 


Any of the four arresting cables will stop your aircraft. Ideally, you will snag the 
3rd wire from the back, called the “3 wire.” Why? Come in too low and you’ll 
crash, come in too high and you’ll miss all four wires. A perfect approach at 
perfect altitude sets you down in the middle of the four wires. Your hook then 
catches the next one, the 3 wire, as you move forward. 


When the main gear touch the deck, apply full military power immediately. If 
you miss the wires you’ve only got a few hundred feet to get airborne again 
and you’ll need every ounce of thrust you have. If the LSO yells “Go around!” or 
“Wave off!”, you know you missed a wire and have to get your aircraft airborne 
quickly. 


Waveoffs 


If the LSO orders a waveoff, apply full military power immediately and climb. If 
you’re extremely low or slow, engage afterburner. Additionally, you may have 
to “clean up” the aircraft, or reduce drag, by retracting flaps, speed brakes, or 
landing gear. 


Do not change course! Continue along the landing heading (in this case 350 
degrees) until you are past the carrier. Reduce engine power as soon as 
possible, keeping speed below 300 kts and altitude below 800 feet. Extend 
past the aircraft carrier, then make a left-hand turn and find the glide path 
again. 


“Touch and Go’s,” using standard bolter procedures, make excellent landing 
practice. Follow all normal landing procedures except do not lower the hook. 
This allows you to practice landings without stopping. 


Back On Deck 


Once you’ve completely stopped moving, reduce power to 25%, raise the 
hook, and release the brakes. Your aircraft will begin moving. Keep power at 
25% or lower for taxiing around the deck. Turn right and taxi toward the forward 
elevator. When you’re clear of the runway, cut engine and reapply brakes. 


Additionally, any time you come to a complete stop on the carrier, your 
aircraft is automatically refueled. If you look toward the forward catapults, 
you’ll see the cat officer signalling you. If you taxi forward, obeying his signals, 
you can reconnect to catapult 1 and launch again. This is another effective 
way of practicing landings. 


Stalls 


A stall occurs when AOA exceeds maximum allowable levels and a smooth 
airflow over the wings is disrupted. Lift evaporates and the airplane falls toward 
the Earth. Knowing how to get out of a stall is critical. 


First Warning: Buffet and Tickle 


As a stall approaches and the airflow over the wings roughen, the plane begins 
to vibrate, with severity increasing as the airflow worsens. The point where the 
vibrations or buffet begins is called the tickle. Pilots with a light touch can feel 
the tickle and realize they’ve reached maximum performance without looking 
at the instrumentation or actually entering a stall. 


Second Warning: Stall Horn 


If you do not take action to increase airflow, usually by relaxing G-load and 


reducing drag, the disruption and buffeting worsens. If possible, try to increase 
speed. Fighter aircraft are equipped with a warning called a stall horn which 
makes a loud, easily distinguishable wail alerting you to the potential stall. 


When the Stall Occurs 


If you still take no corrective action and a stall occurs, the aircraft begins to 
fall. If in a turn, the aircraft remains banked, but stops turning and moves in a 
straight line tangent to the original turn circle. This is called departing 
controlled flight, or departure. 


Stall Recovery 


Airflow must be re-established over the wings to end the stall, which usually 
means increasing the aircraft’s speed. Engaging afterburner in high-thrust 
aircraft, such as the F/A-18, sometimes provides sufficient boost. Most 
aircraft, though, cannot produce enough thrust, even in afterburner, to simply 
blast their way out of a stall. 


Pointing the nose down quickly adds airspeed and helps re-establish smooth 
airflow. Of course, your airplane is dropping, so it’s critical that you have 
enough altitude available. A stall at low altitude is often fatal. Also, aircraft 
control decreases as the stall worsens since there isn’t enough airflow over 
the control surfaces. If you wait too long to begin stall recovery, you may find 
the aircraft uncontrollable. In that event, you’re simply along for the ride and 
waiting until the aircraft begins to recover on its own. Again, at low altitude, 
you may not have enough time to wait. Keep the following guidelines in mind: 


1. 
Attempt stall recovery as soon as possible. The longer you wallow 
uncontrolled around the sky the greater the chance someone will shoot 
you or you will crash. 


2. 
Always monitor airspeed and AOA instruments. Don’t let speed drop 
below stall speed or AOA exceed maximum. 


3. 
Pay attention to stall buffet. If the aircraft buffets, a stall is imminent. 


4. 
Avoid stalls at low altitude. Devote special attention to avoiding stalls 
near the floor. Stall recovery often requires altitude. If there isn’t enough 
room to recover, you could buy the farm. 


Spins 


Spins occur when one wing loses significantly more lift than the other. The 
wing drops, pulling the aircraft into a rotating, spiral dive. As long as the 
rotation continues, most control inputs are useless, and some may even 
aggravate the spin. 


Spins were deadly killers during the early days of aviation, before pioneer 
pilots discovered spin recovery procedures. Some historians estimate more 
World War I pilots died from spinning and crashing their aircraft than from 
combat with the enemy. In U.S. Navy Fighters, spins only occur if you use the 
rudder in the direction of the wing that’s dropping. Since rudder control is 
automatically coordinated in the game, you will only encounter spins while 
manually controlling rudders. 


Some of the aircraft you can fly enter spins easily. Others are easier to 
recover. Note that the F-22, with computer flight controls, will never go into a 
spin. 


Aircraft 
Spin Entry 
Spin Recovery 



F-104* 
Easy 
Hard 


A-7 
Easy 
Easy 


F-14 
Easy 
Hard 


F/A-18 
Easy 
Easy 


Su-33 
Hard 
Easy 


F-22 
Impossible 
Irrelevant 


The F-104 can enter an unrecoverable flat spin if you 
keep feeding rudder into the spin. Your only option in an 
unrecoverable spin is to eject. 


Spin Recovery 


Once understood, spin recovery is relatively easy, but requires prompt action. 
A spin may consume several thousand feet of altitude on each revolution, and 
spin recovery may require several revolutions. Spins at low altitude, therefore, 
are extremely dangerous. Keep the following guidelines in mind: 


1. 
Neutralize lateral stick. Using the ailerons at this point often aggravates 


the spin — center the joystick. 


2. 
Apply full opposite rudder. A message on the HUD will indicate which 
rudder to apply. 


3. 
Apply forward stick. Push the stick forward to keep the nose down. 


4. 
Maintain control inputs until rotation stops. Keep the controls in this 
position until the aircraft stops rotating. You will generally find yourself 
nose-low at low speed and presenting a perfect target for any nearby 
bandits. Gently pull out of the dive, apply full power, and return to normal 
flight. 


5. 
Don’t panic. If you’ve done all of the above the aircraft is unwilling to 
recover, keep your head about you and go through the procedure again. 
You might also try increasing your throttle in addition to the above. 


Chapter 5 


FUNDAMENTALS OF AIR 
COMBAT 


Air combat requires locating, targeting, and attacking the enemy while 
defending yourself against counterattack. 


Terminology 


Contact 
An unidentified object detected by any type of sensor. 


Bogey 
Same as contact. 


Bandit 
A confirmed hostile contact. 


Target 
A targeted contact — not necessarily identified, but 
being tracked by onboard sensors. 


Detection 


Detecting the enemy first gives you the initiative, allowing you to gain 
advantages in altitude, speed, and relative position. In World War I, this 
consisted of visually scanning the skies. Good eyesight counted for a lot in 
the early days of air warfare. This remained true in World War II, though radio 
communications, formation flying, and radar also played important roles. In 
modern air warfare, detection has become a matter of searching a radar scope 
as well as visually scanning the sky. In addition, many modern fighters are 
now equipped not only with radar but infrared sensors, too. 


Active Radar 


Radar emits bursts of electromagnetic energy into the air. When the waves of 
energy strike an object, part of the wave is reflected back to the transmitter. 
Based on the strength of the returning wave, how long it took to return, and its 
frequency shift, the radar system can determine the object’s range, altitude, 
bearing, and speed. 


Active radar allows you to detect and target enemy aircraft at far beyond visual 
range. Maximum search range is limited only by the size of the radar in your 
airplane. The only drawback to active radar is that enemies — both on the 
ground and in the air — can easily detect your radar emissions on their Radar 
Warning Receivers (see below). 


Infrared (IR) Systems 


In addition to active radar, some aircraft also carry infrared (IR) sensor 
systems. The IR-sensor looks for heat generated by other targets. The IR 
system is passive — it doesn’t emit energy, it just looks for objects that are 
“hotter” than the rest of the environment. It can be used freely in combat 
because computer enemies never know when they’re being tracked by 
IR-sensors. 


With the exception of the F-14B and Su-33, all of the airplanes in U.S. Navy 


Fighters can be fitted with a FLIR (Forward Looking Infrared) pod which 
attaches to one of the availble hardpoints. The FLIR pod provides you with 
IR-sensing capabilities, allowing you to target objects like tanks and ground 
vehicles from beyond visual range. The Su-33 does not require a FLIR pod 
because it has a built-in IR-sensing system. 


IR-sensors are limited in that they have a significantly shorter search range 
than active radar. In addition, cloudy and foggy weather can reduce IR-sensing 
effectiveness. 


Radar Warning Receiver 


Active radar can be detected by anyone within range with a Radar Warning 
Receiver (RWR). An RWR is a passive device — it doesn’t emit energy, it just 
detects radar emissions from aircraft, ground units, and ships. 


All radar emissions — friendly or enemy, in the air or on the ground — appear 
on your RWR. Likewise, when you use active radar to search for bandits, your 
radar emissions appear on enemy RWRs. You should judiciously limit active 
radar use when the mission calls for stealth or surprise. 


Detection & Weather 


Sensor performance varies with atmospheric effects. Weather can radically 
increase or reduce sensor performance. The table shows how the range for 
each sensor type is modified for each weather type. The numbers are 
percentages of the respective sensors’ maximum effective range. For 
example, night reduces visual sensors to 25% of their normal range while 
extending IR performance to 125% of normal. 


Weather 
Visual 
Laser 
Infra-red 
Active 
Radar 


Night 
25% 
100% 
125% 
100% 


Day 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 


Twilight 
75% 
100% 
100% 
100% 


Haze 
75% 
100% 
100% 
100% 


Clouds 
10% 
50% 
10% 
75% 


Fog 
25% 
50% 
10% 
100% 


Targeting 


There are several ways to target an object in U.S. Navy Fighters. Personal 
preference and the task at hand should be your guide to which means you 
use. Note that all targeting commands assume some kind of detection device 
— either the object is in visual range directly ahead, or you’ve turned on your 
active radar, IR-sensor, or HARM warhead seeker. 


Targeting Aircraft 


Activation 
Description 


Enter 
When a target is directly in front of you, you can press 


Enter. This locks the next visible object, from left to right. 


Apostrophe (’) 
In the normal forward view you can press apostrophe (’) to 
lock the visible object closest to the center of the screen. 


T or Shift-T 
When the Radar Window is active, you can press T or 
Shift-T to step through each target visible on the Radar 
Window. These commands also apply to the Radar 
Window in IR or HARM mode (see Radar Window in 
Chapter 2: Cockpit Familiarization). Note that if several 
targets are at long range, they may appear as a single 
target in the Radar Window — you may only be able to 
target one of them. 


Click on 
Radar Window 
You can lock on a target by moving the mouse cursor to 
the Radar Window and clicking on a contact. 


Click on 
Visible Target 
You can lock on a target visible in your normal forward view 
by moving the mouse cursor onto it and clicking. 


Targeting Ground Objects 


The pulse-doppler radar systems on most airplanes are designed to 
accurately track fast-moving objects such as other aircraft. These radar are 
incapable of detecting small, slow-moving ground targets like tanks and 
vehicles. 


To target a ground object, you must be carrying a FLIR (Forward-Looking 
Infrared) pod. The FLIR pod lets you target objects in IR mode (see Radar 
Window in Chapter 2: Cockpit Familiarization). Note that the Su-33 has a 
built-in IR-sensor and does not require a FLIR pod. 


If you don’t have a FLIR pod, you can still visually target a ground object. 
When the object appears in your normal forward view, press Enter or 
apostrophe (’) to lock the target. 


The Radar Window in HARM mode can also be used to target ground targets 
employing active radar. Your airplane must be carrying HARM missiles in 
order to target in HARM mode (see Radar Window in Chapter 2: Cockpit 
Familiarization). 


Identification Friend or Foe (IFF) 


Missiles extend combat to beyond visual range (BVR). In a BVR environment, 
identifying targets as friendly or enemy is understandably difficult, especially if 
allied countries fly the same aircraft as your enemies. To overcome this 
problem, air forces typically outfit their aircraft with IFF (Identification Friend or 
Foe) transmitters. These devices allow the pilot to transmit an electronic code 
to a targeted aircraft. If the targeted aircraft’s IFF box answers the code, the 
pilot knows that he’s targeted a friendly aircraft. 


In U.S. Navy Fighters, pressing U sends an IFF transmission to a targeted 
aircraft. If the target aircraft can decipher the transmission, it responds with a 
similar transmission informing you it is friendly. However, if you do not receive 
a reply, you do not necessarily know that the target is hostile. The target 
aircraft’s transponder could be damaged, or it could be a civilian passenger jet 


not equipped with a military transponder. An “UNKNOWN” reply does not 
necessarily mean the target is hostile. 


Note: The transmitter has a range of 100 nm — if 
the target is beyond that range, you’ll still receive an 
“UNKNOWN” message. 


Attacking 


Air-to-Air Missiles 


Air-to-air missiles extend air combat beyond the limits of gun range. Although 
effective weapons, air-to-air missiles are not the “one-shot, one-kill” devices 
they are often billed as. Used improperly, air-to-air missiles perform dismally. 
Air combat success demands a thorough understanding of the weapons at 
hand. 


Semi-Active Radar-Guided 


Semi-active radar-homing (SARH) missiles use emissions from your airplane’s 
radar system to home in on targets. With no radar of their own, these missiles 
must rely completely on the launching aircraft to maintain a lock on the target. 
As long as the aircraft “paints” the target with radar, the missile can maneuver 
toward its prey. If the targeting aircraft breaks its lock — even momentarily — 
the missile may lose its lock and “go ballistic.” 


SARH missiles can be launched at medium ranges (usually 15 - 20 nm) but 
are very poor in the short range. They also don’t typically work well when fired 
from above the target, as radar reflected from the ground confuses the missile. 
The most famous SARH missile — the AIM-7 Sparrow — is notoriously 
inaccurate, especially when pointed at the ground. 


When attacking with a SARH missile, listen for the high-pitched tone emitted 
by your onboard weapons computer — when tone is good and strong, the 
missile is locked onto its target. 


For comparisons of various semi-active radar missiles, see Chapter 8: 
Technical Data. 


Active Radar-Guided Missiles 


Active radar-guided missiles like the AIM-54 Phoenix and AIM-120 AMRAAM 
have their own onboard radar which they use to track targets. Upon launch, 
the missile’s guidance system receives coordinates from the aircraft’s weapon 
system. The missile flies to the designated point and activates its radar, which 
it then uses to home in on the target. Since the missile guides itself, the 
launching aircraft can break its target lock any time after firing. For this 
reason, active radar missiles are known as “fire-and-forget” weapons. 


For comparisons of various active radar missiles, see Chapter 8: Technical 
Data. 


IR-Homing Missiles 


IR-homing (heat-seeking) missiles home in on the heat generated by the 
target. Heat-seeking missiles do not require a radar lock on the target before 
launch or during flight, but their onboard seeker must be tracking the target 
when you fire. Their “lock status” is best communicated through an audible 
“growling” sound. The louder the growl, the better the lock. Compared to 
radar-guided weapons, heat-seeking missiles have fairly short ranges, usually 


between 3 - 10 nm. 


All heat-seeking missiles have a tendency to be confused by the sun and may 
stray off toward it. As a general rule, never fire IR-homers when facing the sun. 
In addition, clouds and fog reduce an IR-seeker’s effective range to 10% of 
normal. 


IR-homing missiles are most accurate when fired from behind a target. Early 
heat-seeking missiles like the AIM-9B are only effective from the target’s rear 
quarter, where the seeker has a clear view of the aircraft’s exhaust. The more 
modern AIM-9M can track targets from any angle, but still work best when 
behind the target. 


Also note that newer heat-seeking missiles have deadlier warheads than their 
older counterparts. The AIM-9M’s annular blast-fragmentation (ABF) warhead 
is significantly more effective than warheads used in older missiles. 


For comparisons of various IR-homing missiles, see Chapter 8: Technical 
Data. 


Launch Considerations 


One thing is always true regarding missiles: they’re fickle creatures prone to 
failure if not handled perfectly. When fired outside of specified parameters, 
they almost always miss. When fired within design launch parameters they 
sometimes miss anyway. The belief that missiles have reduced air combat to 
a long-ranged, guaranteed-kill affair is pure myth. The following restrictions 
apply to missile combat. 


Maneuvering 


The rail or hardpoint the missile mounts on generally has G load restrictions. 
Some missiles can be fired from rails under as much as 7g, others only at 5g 
or less. Hard maneuvering onto a bandit’s six does little good if you can’t fire 
the missile because you’re pulling too many G’s. If you pull G above the 
launch maximum you will lose all lock indicators. 


Launch Parameters 


The closer to maximum range the missile must fly, the greater chance it will 
miss. The AIM-54 Phoenix is hailed as 100 nm-ranged missile, but tactical 
doctrine almost always holds fire until within 80 nm of large targets or 60 nm of 
fighter-sized targets. Why? Because missile engines do not burn for the entire 
missile flight. The motor engages initially and rapidly accelerates the missile 
to top speed. While the engine is burning the missile has incredible thrust and 
is extremely maneuverable. Once the engine runs out of fuel — usually within 
5 - 10 seconds after launch — the missile glides the rest of the way to the 
target, losing speed as it glides. As speed decays, so does maneuverability. 
The AIM-54 can reasonably reach a target at 100 nm, but has virtually no 
maneuverability at that range. If the target isn’t obligingly holding a steady 
flight profile, the missile will almost certainly miss. 


Most missiles have minimum launch ranges, too. The missile requires room to 
get up to speed, and the seeker needs a good lock on the target before it 
starts maneuvering. Since the probability of a direct hit on a maneuvering 
target is unlikely, missiles are designed to cause a wide field of damage. 
Some missiles release a giant, expanding ring of iron bars, while others 
release hundreds of smaller metal fragments. The larger the area covered by 
these warhead, the greater the probability of a kill. Most missiles have 


minimum launch ranges to ensure that the launcher doesn’t inadvertently harm 
himself. 


In general, you want to launch within the missile’s optimal launch parameters. 
These can be gauged by watching the Hit Probability Indicator on your HUD. 


Target Aspect Angle 


Target aspect-angle plays a large roll in missile effectiveness. Low-aspect 
shots, or those fired from directly behind the target, have a greater chance of 
success than those from high-aspect shots fired at the target’s side. In 
general, the missile must pull at least 7 times the G-load as the target. If the 
target is pulling 9g, the missile will need to pull as much as 63g. 


Target aspect also impacts missile range. If the target is moving toward the 
launching airplane, the missile has less distance to travel. The missile can be 
fired sooner, therefore, because the target will “fly into” it. This effectively 
extends the missile’s maximum range. Conversely, if the target is moving 
away, the missile’s effective range is reduced. The missile must be fired from 
a closer range to ensure it has enough energy to travel the additional distance 
covered by the target. 


In general, firing missiles from shorter ranges and from directly behind the 
target results in higher hit rates. Firing from long range at maneuvering targets 
results in lower hit rates. 


Air-to-Ground Weapons 


Air-to-ground weapons come in two basic varieties; guided and unguided. 
Guided weapons, such as Maverick missiles and laser-guided bombs, have 
seekers and the ability to modify their path while flying to the target. Unguided 
weapons, called iron bombs, fall along a predictable trajectory. Both types 
require a different delivery approach. 


Air To-Ground Missiles 


Air-to-ground missiles, such as the IR-homing AGM-65 Maverick or the active 
radar-guided AGM-84E SLAM, are long-range “standoff” weapons. Once fired, 
these weapons do not require the launching aircraft to guide them. As such, 
they are “fire-and-forget” weapons — you can launch them and immediately 
turn toward a new target. 


Anti-Radiation Missiles 


The AGM-88 HARM (Highspeed Anti-Radiation Missile) detects radar 
emissions and homes in on them. HARMs are only useful against objects 
employing active radar, such as SAM sites. If the target shuts off its radar for 
any reason, the missile may lose its lock and fly off course. 


The HARM is another “fire-and-forget” weapon — once launched, the missile 
requires no guidance from the aircraft. 


Iron Bombs 


Despite technological advances, most militaries still rely on inexpensive, 
low-tech general purpose “iron bombs” for destroying enemy targets. 


Bombs rely on gravity to pull them down to the target. Once released, they 
follow a predictable path to the Earth based on the aircraft’s pitch, speed and 
altitude. The higher the aircraft is, the longer the bomb’s range. 


Accurately dropping bombs is easier said than done. If your airplane is moving 
wildly upon release, the bombs will fall likewise. It’s important that you hold 
the aircraft stable while dropping bombs. Iron bombs are further limited by a 
short range of 1 - 2 nm. Beyond this range the chance of hitting the intended 
target is almost zero. 


Laser-Guided Bombs 


A laser-guided bomb is an iron bomb fitted with a seeker and movable 
canards, which help guide the weapon to the target. The bombing sequence 
works like this. The aircraft illuminates the target with a “laser-designator” 
carried on one of the aircraft’s hardpoints. Once the bomb is dropped, its 
seeker homes in on the laser reflection and provides direction to the movable 
canards. The canards modify the bomb’s glide path to some extent, resulting 
in more accurate hits than conventional iron bombs. 


In U.S. Navy Fighters, both NATO and Russian laser-guided bombs require the 
Pave Spike laser designator for target illumination. You must maintain a lock 
on the target until the bomb has hit — if you suddenly target another object, 
the bomb will fall blindly to the ground and will most likely miss. 


Guns 


Once thought out-dated by the air-to-air missiles, the gun has proven itself a 
staple of air combat. 


Guns are generally effective only under 2 nm. A single burst of gunfire 
generally won’t kill an aircraft. It may cripple it, but unless you’re lucky enough 
to wound the pilot, a single hit probably won’t remove the enemy aircraft from 
the fight. 


Defensive Systems 


Attacking the enemy is only half the job — surviving the mission is the other 
half. Your aircraft carries various defensive systems designed to protect you 
and your airplane. 


Warning Tones 


Two audible tones support the RWR: one for radar-guided missiles, and 
another for IR-guided missiles. A slow-pulsing tone indicates an enemy seeker 
is tracking your aircraft. A fast-pulsing tone indicates an inbound missile is 
tracking your aircraft. Both of these tones are lower-pitched than the lock tone 
indicating one of your missiles is locked on to a target and ready to be fired. 


Chaff 


Chaff is the standard defense against radar-guided missiles. Chaff consists of 
spools of material designed to reflect enemy radar signals. Hopefully, the 
material will reflect more radar energy than your aircraft, thus providing a 
“brighter” target for the missile’s seeker. With careful use, chaff will attract 
inbound missiles away from your aircraft. 


Flares 


Flares are the heat-seeking equivalent to chaff. Flares create hot, bright 
fireballs designed to attract heat-seeking missiles. Older heat-seeking 
missiles are easily deceived by flares while newer designs are quite resistant. 


Jamming 


Electronic Counter Measures, or ECM, attempts to deceive enemy radar by 
emitting large amounts of electromagnetic energy. Also called “jamming,” 
these bursts of energy appear as “fake” radar returns to the radar source. The 
radar source sees not just the “real” radar return, but all the “fake” ones 
generated by the jammer. The radar cannot distinguish the real one from the 
fake ones, so it displays them all on the radar screen. Because of the fake 
returns, the radar knows something is out there, and even which direction it’s 
at, but cannot determine the target’s precise location. Therefore, jamming 
announces your presence to the enemy, but hides your exact position from 
them. RWRs also detect jamming signals; therefore, never use jamming 
unless the enemy is using active radar. 


Using Defensive Systems 


Missiles are very maneuverable but have limits. Remaining outside of the 
enemy missile’s range is by far the best defense. Failing that, using ECM at 
moderate to long ranges may jam enemy radar and prevent enemies from firing 
at you. ECM has no effect against heat-seeking missiles and unpredictable 
results against radar-homing missiles fired at close range. Under these 
conditions you must rely on maneuvering and chaff or flares to defeat the 
missile. 


Beating Radar-Guided Missiles 


Normally, turn toward the missile such that the missile is always facing your 
side. This forces the missile to continually turn to track you. Keep the missile 
off your wing using low G turns as the missile closes. When the missile 
closes within 2,000 feet, rapidly release 3 or 4 chaff and execute a maximum 
G break turn toward the missile. Ideally, the missile will momentarily target the 
chaff cloud while the high-G turn moves you outside the missile’s field of view. 
When the missile loses lock it stops pointing at you. Using alternate views, 
such as the F5 window, to watch the missile’s smoke trail to determine if it’s 
still tracking you or not. Remember that your warning horn will sound at a 
faster-pace as long as the missile is tracking you. 


Beating Heat-Seeking Missiles 


The same procedure for radar-guided missiles holds for heat-seeking missiles 
substituting flares for chaff. Older heat-seeking missiles require a clear view of 
your aircraft’s exhaust. Besides out-maneuvering the missile, the break turn 
may hide your exhaust from the missile’s seeker. Turning toward the sun and 
turning off your afterburners may also help. With any luck, the flares or the sun 
will entice the heat-seeker away from your aircraft. 


Guns Defenses 


Jinking, or making numerous, unpredictable, erratic flight movements, is the 
standard guns defense. The key to evading enemy gunfire is being 
unpredictable. The enemy may be firing anywhere from 1/2 to 2 miles away 
and must aim his bullets at where he thinks you’ll be by the time the bullets 
get there. Changing course often gives your opponent ample room to make a 
mistake. 


Signatures 


Every object has a set of “signatures” corresponding to each sensor type. For 
example, an object’s “radar signature” indicates how easily it is detected by 
radar. Your aircraft’s configuration can modify signature values. For example, 
using afterburner increases your IR signature to 200%, making you twice as 
detectable as normal. Carrying external stores increases your radar signature 
by 33%, making you one-third more detectable than a “clean” aircraft. 
Lowering gear likewise increases radar signature by 25%. 


Radar jamming reduces the chances of being tracked by radar sources but 
drastically increases your chances of being detected. Pointing your aircraft at 
a sensor greatly reduces the corresponding signature since an aircraft 
appears smallest when viewed from directly ahead. 


Taking Hits: The Effects of Damage 


With luck your airplane will never see damage. In the event that you take 
some hits, though, it’s good to know what’s critical and what’s not. 


Each aircraft has multiple subsystems, such as propulsion and control 
surfaces, and each subsystem has multiple items, such as fuel flow, 
elevators, etc. 


Damaged control surfaces make the aircraft difficult to fly or possibly even 
uncontrollable. The autopilot cannot be used with damaged control surfaces. 
Damaged elevators reduce pitch control, damaged ailerons reduce roll control, 
damaged rudder usually causes the aircraft to yaw one way or the other. 
Some types of damage cause the aircraft to porpoise or jolt in random 
directions. If the hit damages the airframe, pulling high G loads will likely 
destroy it. 


Several types of propulsion damage ultimately lead to a catastrophic failure. 
Damage to the oil systems causes engine overheating unless the throttle is 
kept low. Even then aircraft may eventually overheat. Compressor damage 
risks catastrophic engine failure when the engine is above 25% throttle. 
Damaged tail cones limit afterburner use. 


Generally, when the engine takes damage, reduce power. Engine explosion 
may be inevitable based on the extent of damage, but reducing power will 


always delay it. If intuition tells you the engine is about to explode, bail out. 


You, the pilot, may also take damage from explosions, shrapnel, or fire. Each 
wound requires medical attention or you will die. You may have as much as 15 
minutes or so to return to base after the first wound, but subsequent wounds 
greatly reduce that time. 


Wingman Commands 


Lone wolf cowboy tactics will leave you riding the silk elevator down to the 
ocean every time. Aircraft work in groups, usually pairs, for mutual support and 
protection. Your wingman is there to protect you and you’re there to protect 
him. 


Your wingman executes command based on formation scope. There are two 
formation scopes: Loose and Medium. 


Loose 
Under Loose control, your wingman will break from 
your formation when an enemy is detected or if an 
incoming missile is detected. Once he moves out of 
formation to attack, he will continue to search for and 
engage enemies until you tell him to disengage. 


Medium 
Under Medium control, your wingman remains in 
formation unless you direct him to attack a target, 
though he will break in order to avoid an incoming 
missile. 


There are 19 different wingman commands available: 


When You 
Press 
Command Name 
The Wingman Executes 


Alt - 1 
Fly straight and 
level 
Wingman rolls out and flies 
straight and level 


Alt - 2 
Break left 
Wingman breaks left 


Alt - 3 
Break right 
Wingman breaks right 


Alt - 4 
Break low 
Wingman breaks low 


Alt - 5 
Break high 
Wingman breaks high 


Alt - 6 
Approach left 


Alt - 7 
Approach right 


Alt - 8 
Approach low 


Alt - 9 
Approach high 


Alt - B 
Bug Out 
Order wingman to return to 
base 


Alt - C 
Toggle control 
scope 
Selects control scope loose or 
medium 


Alt - T 
Set formation type 
Selects formation type 


Alt - H 
Set formation 
horizontal spacing 
Specifies horizontal distance 
between you and wingman 


Alt - V 
Set formation 
vertical spacing 
Specifies vertical spacing 
between you and wingman 


Alt - E 
Engage my target 
Orders wingman to break from 
formation and engage whatever 
target you currently have 
locked 


Alt - W 
Engage target class 
Order wingman to engage all 
targets of the same type as 
the target you currently have 
locked 


Alt - R 
Engage from 
formation 
Orders wingman to engage 
your target but remain in 
formation with you (ie, use a 
long-ranged missile like the 
AIM-54) 


Alt - P 
Protect me 
Orders wingman to attack 
bandits threatening you. 


Alt -D 
Disengage 
Orders wingman to break off 
attack and reform on your wing. 


Chapter 6 


ADVANCED COMBAT 
TECHNIQUES 


Air combat is a complex, dynamic environment. To succeed, you must be 
thoroughly prepared before engaging the enemy. The following are theoretical 
principles that have real application in U.S. Navy Fighters. Understand them 
and you’ll be well on your way to becoming an ace. 


Geometry 


A few geometry concepts are needed for a complete discussion of air combat. 


Angle Off Tail 


Angle off tail (AOT) measures the angle between your flight path and that of 
the target. At low AOT, you are either at the target’s 6 o’clock as it moves 
away from you, or at it’s 12 o’clock as it moves toward you. In either case, 
weapons need only fly a straight line into the target. Almost all weapons 
perform better when fired from low AOT. 


As AOT increases, the target is moving away from your flight path. Missiles 
have to turn more to track the target and gun shots must lead the target, 
allowing the target to “fly to” the bullets. During a sustained engagement your 
goal is to reduce AOT as much as possible before firing. 


Aspect Angle 


Aspect angle indicates which aspect of the target is facing you. Think of it as 
a numerical way of expressing which part of the target you’re looking at. 


From the diagram, you can see that a “left 90 degree” aspect angle on the 
target means that if you looked at the target — regardless of where it is 
around your airplane — you would see its left wing. A low aspect angle 


(approaching zero) indicates that the target’s tail is in view. A high aspect 
angle (approaching 180) means the target’s nose is pointed at you. 


Closure Rate 


Closure rate is the combat epitome of the old high school math problems 
about trains leaving Dallas and Kansas City at different times headed for each 
other. Closure is your aircraft’s speed relative to a moving target. If closure is 
positive you are getting closer to the target; if it’s negative the target is getting 
farther away. The higher the value of the number, the faster the range is 
changing. A closure of -700 kts means the target is moving away from you 
very fast while a closure of -70 kts means the target is moving away from you 
slowly. 


Alternatively, visualize closure as the speed you would be flying if your target 
suddenly became stationary. If you and your target are flying directly at each 
other both at 450 kts, your closure speed is 900 kts. If you happened to be 
900 nm apart, it would take you one hour to pass each other. If the target 
suddenly froze in mid-air, your aircraft would have to accelerate to 900 kts to 
arrive at the target in the same length of time. 


Closure, therefore, is a good indicator of the target’s aspect. When closure is 
a high positive value, you know he’s heading for you. Closure also impacts 
weapon performance. At a high positive closure rate, the range to the target is 
rapidly decreasing. A missile doesn’t have to fly as far to the target since the 
target reduces range by flying into the missile. Conversely, if the closure is a 
high negative value, the target is running away and the missile must fly farther 
to overtake the target. 


Pursuit Curves 


When dogfighting, there are three types of pursuit, lead, lag, and pure. 
Depending on the combat situation, you will find all three necessary 


Lead Pursuit 


As the name implies, lead pursuit means predicting where the target aircraft 
will fly next, then leading the target, or pointing your nose ahead of the target. 
In other words, you point your flight path to cross the target’s predicted flight 
path. 


Because you’re pointing ahead of the target, lead pursuit increases closure, or 
the rate at which you approach the target. If you’re positioned beyond your 
weapon’s maximum range, lead pursuit will bring you closer to your opponent. 
Lead pursuit, however, depends upon accurately predicting where the bandit 
will fly. Pulling your aircraft into lead pursuit causes the target to disappear 
beneath your aircraft’s nose. If the target makes an erratic maneuver, you may 
be unable to see it. Therefore, as is so often the case in ACM, small, patient, 
persistent lead pursuit angles that keep the target in sight are the most 
desirable. 


Pure Pursuit 


Pure pursuit is a direct chase. You point your aircraft directly at the target and 
follow its maneuvers. Pure pursuit is generally used when firing weapons. At 
long ranges, both missiles and guns require some leading, but at close ranges 
put your nose directly on the target and fire. 


Lag Pursuit 


As the name implies, lag pursuit points your flight path behind the target, 
using turn rate, not turn radius, to follow the enemy. Lag pursuit is a critical 
combat tactic that requires not only an awareness of the battle, but an 
awareness of your aircraft’s capabilities. 


Whereas lead pursuit increases G-loading to tighten turn radius and point 
ahead of the target, lag pursuit surrenders the turn radius battle and relies on 
turn rate. For example, comparing the different turn rates and turn radii of a 
F-18, F-4, and MiG-21 at 36,000 feet at a constant 4g, you can see that the 
F-18 has a significant edge over both other aircraft using a significantly slower 
speed. 


Now imagine a high-speed F-18 with a low speed MiG-21. The Hornet comes 
screaming in at mach 1.4 towards the MiG moving a mere Mach .5. At this 
speed, the F-18 has a superior turn rate, but a vastly inferior turn radius. There 
is no way the Hornet can turn inside the slower adversary. 


The maximum amount of G the F-18 can pull under these circumstances is 
5.25g for a 9.5¡/second turn rate, compared to the MiG-21’s 2g for a 6¡/second 


turn rate. The F-18 can use its turn rate advantage to lag pursue the bandit 
despite a turn radius disadvantage. The F-18 can relax to approximately 4g 
and match the MiG-21’s turn rate, circumscribing a concentric turn circle 
outside the MiG-21 without overshooting. 


This a perfect lag pursuit opportunity for the F-18, granted the pilot realizes his 
turn rate is better than his enemy’s. If the F-18 tries to match the MiG-21’s 
turn radius by pulling a maximum 5.25g, he will not only overshoot by some 
3,000 feet, but will rapidly bleed speed as drag increases, wasting his initial 
energy advantage. Lag pursuit allows the F-18 to remain in the MiG-21’s blind 
spot (i.e., directly beneath it), avoid overshooting, and effectively conserve its 
initial energy advantage. 


Lag pursuit is easy to execute. Pull back on the stick until the target aircraft 
is positioned on your HUD only slightly above the flight path indicator, then 
release pressure on the stick so that it remains stationary at that HUD 
position. 


Energy Management 


There are two types of energy in the world, kinetic and potential. Energy, in 
both its manifestations, is the core of aerial combat. At any given instant, an 
aircraft possesses some quantity of kinetic energy (measured by its speed) 
and some quantity of potential energy (measure by its altitude). Energy 
translates directly into maneuverability. Air Combat Maneuvering, or ACM, is a 
game of managing energy to maximize maneuverability and defeat the enemy. 


Exchanging Energy 


Energy types are exchangeable. An aircraft at high altitude and slow speed 
has lots of potential energy, but little kinetic energy. By diving, the aircraft can 
convert the altitude into speed, thus increasing kinetic energy. A fast aircraft 
at low altitude has lots of kinetic energy but little potential energy. The aircraft 
can convert the kinetic energy back to potential energy by climbing. The 
aircraft slows down, but its altitude increases, maintaining the aircraft’s total 
energy state. An aircraft at low speed and low altitude has very little total 
energy. An aircraft with energy has maneuvering options, an aircraft without 
energy generally becomes a target. 


Maneuvering uses energy. Every maneuver you make “burns” kinetic energy. 
Because you want maximum maneuverablility from your aircraft at all times, 
you must ration your energy use, always maintaining a sufficient supply for 
whatever maneuver you might execute. 


Playing the Energy Management Game 


Never waste energy. Don’t pull 6g when 2g will suffice. How do you know that 
lower G loading is acceptable? Watch his nose and remember this simple 
rule: when his nose isn’t pointed at you, he’s not a threat. 


Obviously, most weapons can be fired from various aspect angles besides 
directly astern, but by watching his nose you can determine when he’s 
achieving a firing solution. For guns, his nose must be pointed slightly ahead 
of you due to lead requirements. Even with missiles, his nose must be pointed 
generally in your direction for a decent shot. 


If he’s behind you and pulling into a firing solution, you need to extract every 
ounce of maneuverability from your airframe. If, however, he doesn’t have his 
nose pointed toward you, he cannot shoot at you. Before spending the 


maximum G available you have to determine what you’ll get in return. If you 
pull max G now, will you get a shot opportunity? If not, then pulling maximum 
G is probably a bad idea. 


When you’re out of energy, you have to get some back. Extending for energy 
means relaxing the back pressure and rebuilding airspeed. It can mean 
unloading to 1g and flying straight and level, or it can mean simply unloading 
from 4g to 3g and slow the energy bleed. Many times, wasting energy at a 
slower rate is as important as getting more back. 


In short, treat energy as money. You can save it, waste it, or spend it 
foolishly, and once it’s gone it’s gone forever. 


Picking Your Fight 


Arguably, the first few seconds of a fight are the most important. With most 
dogfights lasting less than a minute, whoever grabs the advantage in the first 
few seconds usually wins. Ideally, you want to start the fight with an 
advantage, such as directly behind the bandit in his six o’clock low blind spot. 
Most of the time that’s not an option and you find yourself closing 
head-to-head with the bad guy. 


Choosing The Energy Fight 


The energy fight basically concedes turning performance to the enemy. The 
energy fighter keeps his speed extremely high, minimizes lateral separation 
on the merge, tries to take a shot at the bandit at the merge, then extends in 
a straight line far beyond the opponent. The energy fighter must maintain 
enough speed to quickly exceed his opponent’s weapon range. This isn’t too 
difficult if the bandit only has guns or heat-seeking missiles. While the bandit 
executes a high G turn to enter the fight, the energy fighter zooms away in 
spiralling dive or climb. Eventually, the energy fighter executes a low G turn (to 
conserve airspeed) and makes another pass at the bandit, in a “hit-and-run” 
attack. 


When executed correctly, the energy fighter remains outside the bandit’s 
weapon envelope nearly the entire fight. The energy fighter chooses when and 
where he’ll engage, always bringing the fight on his terms. Even better, thanks 
to the speed surplus, the energy fighter can extend and exit the fight almost at 
will. The energy fight requires discipline, though. One speed-bleeding turn and 
the energy fight option is gone forever. 


Angles Versus Energy 


At the merge you have a choice: enter a knife fight and rely on your turn 
performance to win the day (the angles fight), or use superior energy and 
hit-and-run tactics (the energy fight). Every fight is different, and an aircraft 
designed for angles fighting may find itself better suited for an energy fight. 
How do you decide which to use? 


First, estimate your turn performance versus your opponent’s. Being at and 
maintaining your corner speed means squat if the bandit can out-perform your 
best turn. Second, estimate your energy status. If you enter a fight 200 or 300 
kts above your corner speed, don’t merely waste all of that energy and 
decelerate to corner, initiate an energy fight and make use of that power. A 
well-flown energy fight is difficult to beat, as proven in Vietnam by F-4 pilots 
flying against MiG-17 and MiG-21 opponents. 


Setting Up the Merge 


The merge, or meeting the bandit head on, generally leads to one of two types 
of fights: one-circle or two-circle. 


Two-Circle Fights 


Two-circle fights, also called nose-to-tail fights, commence when both fighters 
turn toward each other at the merge. The distance between the fighters, called 
lateral separation, is turning room both fighters use, that is, part of their turn 
radius toward the bandit is offset by the lateral separation. 


Two-circle fights rely on turn rate more than turn radius. The pilot tries to 
create enough lateral separation at the merge to account for his turn radius, 
then relies on a superior turn rate to bring his nose to bear on the bandit 
faster. Two-circle fights keep the bandit in view at all times and also tend to 
increase the distance between the aircraft. 


Generally, attempt to minimize lateral separation to the distance of your turn 
radius. If the enemy aircraft has substantially worse turn performance than 
you, don’t give him any extra room to work with, keep lateral separation to the 
bare minimum you require. If the bandit has significantly better turn 
performance than you, deny him the chance to use it by coming in at 
maximum speed with as little lateral separation as possible. 


One-Circle Fights 


One-circle fights commence when both fighters turn the same direction. One 
fighter sacrifices any lateral separation, relying on turn radius to out maneuver 
the enemy. The one-circle fight is generally only used when you have a 
significant turn radius advantage over the bandit. 


The one-circle fight tends to keep the participants closer together than the 
two-circle fight. The fighter that chooses to go one-circle and turns away from 
the bandit must momentarily lose sight as the bandit crosses his tail. In 
fighters with poor rearward visibility, this loss of visual contact can be 
devastating. Since the one-circle fighter surrenders the lateral separation to 
the bandit, he should minimize lateral separation during the merge. 


Timing The Initial Turn 


Timing the initial turn is critical. Turning too soon or too late surrenders 
advantage and often proves fatal. Turning too soon pulls you across the 
bandit’s nose, not only giving him a snapshot opportunity but also putting you 
on the defensive. Turning too late puts you out of position and allows the 
bandit to gain angles. The perfectly timed turn should deny the bandit any 
advantages while maximizing your own performance. 


Air Combat Maneuvers 


Break Turn 


The break turn is the most basic of all combat maneuvers designed to 
increase AOT rapidly when a bandit is preparing to shoot you. It is a high G 
maneuver utilizing maximum instantaneous turn rate toward the attacker. 


Once you execute a break turn, do something else almost immediately. 
Sustaining a break turn leaves you as a nice, stable, predictable target waiting 
to die. Once the break turn has commenced, both you and the target share a 
common plane in space. Generally, your next maneuver should take you out 
of this plane and even further away from the target. 


High Yo Yo 


The high yo yo is the root of all offensive air combat, replacing intelligent 
maneuvering for “G for brains” high-G tactics. The high yo yo reduces AOT at 
the cost of increased range between attacker and target. 


The yo yo begins during a turning fight when you have assumed an aggressive 
position behind the bandit, but are stuck in lag pursuit and unable to bring your 
nose to bear. Roll out slightly, maintaining the lag pursuit, then pull the nose 
up. 


Generally, a series of small yo yos that nibble away at the AOT problem work 
better than one large yo yo. Once committed to a large yo yo, you’ll be unable 
to respond to any sudden changes the bandit may make. Patiently working 
small yo yos by bringing the nose just above the horizon chips away at your 
AOT problem and moves you into the target’s elbow without pulling super high 


G loads. 


Low Yo Yo 


The low yo yo is the logical opposite of the high yo yo and performs the exact 
opposite function. Whereas the high yo yo decreases AOT and increases 
range, the low yo yo increases AOT while decreasing range. 


The low yo yo is generally used when you and have a good shot opportunity, 
but you’re outside your weapon’s maximum range. To get closer, you lower 
your nose below the horizon. Lowering the nose increases speed. 
Unfortunately, the increased speed almost always results in increased turn 
radius, forcing you into lag pursuit and increasing AOT. A low yo yo, therefore, 
almost always requires a following high yo yo to correct the angles problem 
generated by the increased speed. 


The low yo yo is often used in chases where the bandit has superior speed, 
has leveled its wings, and is trying to run home as you chase it from just 
outside your weapon’s envelope. In this case, you could lower the nose and 
dive below the target. The increases speed will increase closure, but you must 
be careful not to dive too steeply. If you dive too far below the target or build up 
too much speed in the dive, you may still be unable to bring the nose to bear 
on the target which is now far above you. 


Barrel Roll 


The barrel derives its name from the flight path the aircraft performs, 
circumscribing the shape of a barrel in the sky. The barrel roll is more than an 
airshow stunt, it’s an energy management maneuver with both offensive and 
defensive potential. 


Offensive Barrel Rolls 


Offensively, always remember: do anything it takes to prevent an overshoot. 
Overshooting and flying in front of an enemy are deadly mistake which will 
most likely cost you your simulated life. Overshoots are caused by excessive 
closure which you can’t get rid off; you approach the bandit too fast and can’t 
stop in time. The barrel roll is one solution. If you can’t reduce speed fast 
enough by pulling the nose up, then pull back on the stick and execute an 
aileron roll to the direction opposite of your current turn. The raised nose 


reduces speed while the roll out turns you away from the target and prevents 
an overshoot. Completing the roll leaves you heading in the original course, 
albeit no longer overtaking the enemy. 


Defensive Barrel Rolls 


The barrel roll can be used to force the attacker to overshoot while maintaining 
enough AOT to prevent him from firing at you. Defensive barrel rolls must be 
carefully timed. Initiate the roll too soon and the bandit will recognize it and 
follow you through it. Start it too late and the bandit will have already shot you. 
Perfect timing requires surprising the bandit and denying him sufficient time to 
react before he overshoots. 


Scissors 


Ask any combat pilot and he’ll tell you the same thing: if you get into a 
scissors fight, you screwed up. 


A scissors is a series of reversing turns where each aircraft turn back towards 
each other, each trying to force the other out in front. A scissors usually 
begins when the attacker realizes he’s going to overshoot. The defender sees 
the imminent overshoot and reverses his turn back toward the attacker too 
early, thus resulting in a fairly neutral pass. If you’re an attacker, the only way 
you can get into a scissors duel is by screwing up and overshooting. If you’re 
offensive, scissoring should be the last thing on your mind. If you’re defensive, 
you already screwed up. Reversing into a scissors indicates the attacker also 
made a mistake, but you compounded your error by reversing too soon and 
wasting the advantage. 


Once in a scissors, there’s nothing to do but keep the G high and keep turning 
into the bandit. Of course, this bleeds speed and energy horrendously. Ideally, 
the “winner” of a scissors match forces the bandit ahead of him while still 
having enough energy to bring his nose to bear. More often, one aircraft stalls 
out and plummets earthward. If the other aircraft has any semblance of energy 
left it rolls, dives on the bandit, and shoots it before it recovers. Alternatively, 
the participants may begin a series of barrel rolls instead of break turns. This 
maintains some energy due to the altitude/speed tradeoffs, but is far from an 
ideal solution. 


Each time the aircraft cross, they risk both collision and gunfire. Passing too 
far apart allows your opponent a guns snapshot while passing too close 
usually results in a crash. In short, scissoring is not good. 


If you find yourself in a scissors, how do you get out? In a guns only 
environment, executing a split-S immediately after crossing your opponent’s 
tail usually does the trick. If you can rapidly increase and maintain speed, you 
can extend beyond his gun range. Executing a split-S in a missile 
environment invites a heat seeker up your exhaust. If you can’t get outside the 


bandit’s weapon range, then you have to win the scissors fight. If you can’t win 
the fight by out-turning the bandit, you’re dead. 


Immelman 


The immelman is a high-thrust, vertical reversal. Effected by pitching the nose 
up, low-thrust aircraft usually execute one-half of a loop and terminate the 
maneuver at a higher altitude, inverted, flying the opposite direction. 
High-thrust jets broaden the maneuver by climbing pure vertical, using an 
aileron roll during the climb, then completing the half loop. This effectively 
allows the aircraft to make square corners in the horizontal by displacing the 
vertical. 


Split S 


A split-S is a diving half loop. Rolling inverted and pulling back on the stick 
causes the aircraft to dive. Maintain back pressure until the aircraft levels out 
heading in the opposite direction. 


The split-S gains speed quickly. Besides diving, rolling inverted adds the 
aircraft’s lift vector to gravity, thus increasing acceleration. On the down side, 
the increased speed increases vertical turning radius. Start a split-S from low 
altitude or maintain too much speed during the dive and the aircraft won’t be 
able to pull out. 


The split-S makes a great escape maneuver in a guns-only environment 
because of the rapid speed gain. It’s usually ineffective in missile 
environments, though, since missiles have significantly longer ranges. 


Ground Attack 


Surviving ground-attack missions boils down to hitting the enemy while not 
getting hit yourself. 


Surprise 


Surprising the enemy is always a good thing. Try flying low, 500 ft or less, 
under the enemy’s radar. Ground-based radar systems can detect your 
aircraft at high altitude but not close to the ground. Many enemy air-defense 
units have to physically move to engage your aircraft. If you approach 
undetected from an unexpected direction the air-defenses may be unprepared. 
It takes them time to turn and engage, giving you an opportunity to deliver 
ordnance and escape. 


Radar also cannot penetrate fixed objects, like hills and buildings. Try flying 
low between hills or behind clusters of buildings to hide from enemy radar. 


Remain Outside Enemy Range 


Try to stay outside of enemy defense envelopes. For example, if the target is 
heavily defended with radar-guided SAMs, approach at low altitude; such 
SAMs often have trouble engaging low-altitude targets. If the primary defense 
is anti-aircraft artillery (AAA), stay above 5,000 feet; AAA cannot reach that 
high. 


Similarly, try using long-ranged standoff weapons. If the enemy defenses have 
a maximum range of 20 nm, attack with a 30 nm-ranged weapon. This keeps 
you safely outside of the enemy’s defenses. Obviously, standoff weapons 
won’t always be available or suitable for a given mission, but always consider 
using them. 


AAA Weaknesses 


AAA is deadly against low-altitude targets but does have limitations. While 
modern AAA uses radar to calculate lead requirements, older AAA systems 
must eyeball you in their sights. Older AAA systems, therefore, must lead you 


— if you approach them from any direction other than head on, you’re almost 
guaranteed that they’ll miss. Further, the faster you fly and the more you jink, 
the harder it is for AAA to calculate lead. 


Chapter 7 


DESIGNING PRO MISSIONS 


Using the Pro Mission Creator you can create complex combat situations with 
multiple aircraft, ground forces, and complex mission objectives. 


To view the Pro Mission Creator, click on Create Pro Mission in the Choose 
Activity Menu. 


Though creating a challenging mission is more of an art than a science — 
requiring many modifications until the mission is suitably “difficult” — the 
process can be boiled down to a few basic activities: 


Determining an objective for each side 


Choosing weather and time of day 


Adding friendly and enemy units 


Assigning units objectives and waypoints 


Determining An Overall Objective 


All missions begin with objectives, that is, what each side is attempting to 
accomplish. Objectives should be thought of in terms of attacking and 
countering an attack. If one side’s objective is to strike a target, the other 
side’s objective is to defend it. Even air superiority missions require offensive 
and defensive roles – one side flies in to sweep the enemy from the skies, 
while the other rises up to counter them. 


An interesting mission requires a challenging goal and well-balanced 
gameplay. If the mission is too simple or too hard, players will lose interest. 
Your goal as mission designer is to create a challenging but achievable 
mission. 


Setting Friendly & Hostile Sides 


The first step in creating your mission is deciding which countries are “friendly” 
and which countries are “hostile.” 


To set hostile forces, select Set friendly & enemy sides... from the World 
Menu. A control panel appears: 


Buttons that are ON are considered hostile; buttons that are not ON are 
automatically considered friendly. To change a country’s alliance, click on its 
button. 


Setting Weather/Time of Day 


Weather conditions and time of day can help or hinder all sides in air combat. 
For example, cloud cover and darkness provide visual cover for attacking 
aircraft and create headaches for the defenders. 


To choose the weather or time of day for your mission, select Set weather... 
from the World Menu. A control panel appears: 


Select from the available weather conditions and times of day. Click OK or 
press Enter. 


The Mission Map 


The mission map displays the theater where the mission will take place. 


Even before you add aircraft, ships, and ground units to the world, there are a 
number of permanent objects — runways, bridges, roads, etc. — fixed on the 
map. You can see all permanent objects by selecting Other from the Show 
Menu. 


Permanent objects cannot be deleted, changed, or assigned as mission 
objectives. They can be attacked during the mission, and fragile objects like 
buildings and bridges can be destroyed; however, damage done to permanent 
objects have no bearing on mission outcomes. 


Viewing the Map 


To zoom in and out on the mission map, click on either end of the Zoom 
Button or press plus (+) or minus (-). 


To scroll the mission map, point to either of the Scroll Buttons, hold down a 
mouse button, and drag. Alternately, you can scroll the map using the cursor 
arrow keys on your keyboard. 


Adding Objects 


Select Add from the Object Menu, or press Insert. The Add Object selection 
panel appears: 


The selection panel lists all of the objects in U.S. Navy Fighters. Objects 
followed by asterisks (***) can be flown by players; all other objects must be 
controlled by the computer. 


Click to choose an object, and then press Enter. The object’s icon appears in 
the center of the map: 


Note: If the object doesn’t appear on the map, make 
sure that the class to which it belongs is currently 
activated in the Show Menu. 


Selecting & Moving Units 


Click on any unit to select it. To move a selected unit to another location, 
point to the unit icon, hold down the left mouse button, and drag the unit. 


Duplicating Objects 


Once you’ve created a unit, you can make as many copies of it as the 
mission requires. To duplicate a unit, select Duplicate from the Object Menu 
or press D. 


Unit Options 


Once an object is placed, you can define what kind of object is, its 
assignment, and its effect on the player’s success or failure. 


To modify the object, its assignment, or its effect on the mission, click on one 
of the text buttons. 


Object Description 


The text buttons at the top of the panel allow you to define the object. 


Nationality 
Brings up the Choose Nationality selection panel, 
allowing you to change the object’s nationality. Click 
on a nationality, and then click OK or press Enter. 


Object Type 
Brings up Choose Object selection panel, allowing 
you to change the type of object. Click on a new 
type, and then click OK or press Enter. 


Name 
Brings up the Enter Pilot Name panel. Type a name 
for the pilot, and then click OK or press Enter. 


Experience 
Click to choose the experience of the pilot: novice, 
average, good, or expert. Pilot experience affects 
many things: how well the pilot pays attention to his 
radar and RWR; his repertoire of offensive and 
defensive maneuvers; etc. 


Control 
Click to designate whether the pilot is controlled by a 


human or the computer. Note that humans can only 
control a limited number of aircraft. 


Heading 
Click to give the object an initial heading: north, 
south, east, or west. 


Speed 
Click to give the object an initial speed, ranging from 
0 to 3,000 kts. Note that setting a speed does not 
guarantee that the object is capable of that speed. 


Object Assignment 


The assignment options allow you to designate: 


An enemy the object should attack 


A friendly the object should protect 


The object’s reactions to various classes of enemies 


Specific Tasks 


You can assign the object to destroy a target or protect a friendly object. Click 
on the text button, and then click on the enemy target or friendly object. 


Reactions 


For every aircraft, ship, and ground unit in the mission, you must specify 
reactions to various classes of enemies. You can set the following types of 
reactions: 


Attack 
Search for enemy targets of this class and attack 
them. 


Defend 
Defend if under attack from class type of enemy. 


Ignore 
Ignore enemies of this class. 


Evade 
Attempt to gain separation between you and any 
object of this class. 


Search Range 


You can designate the range at which the object will search for enemies. Note 
that any particular object is still limited by the range of its detection device. 


Object’s Effect On Mission 


Mission Objective 


The mission options let you designate the object as a “mission objective.” 
Mission objectives determine whether the player succeeded or failed. You can 
designate the following for the currently selected object: 


Mission success is not affected by object. 


The object has no bearing on the player’s success or failure. 


Mission success only if object is destroyed. 


The player must destroy the object in order to succeed. 


Mission success only if object survives. 


The player must protect the object from all aggressors. 


Mission success only if object finishes waypoints. 


The player must protect the object from all aggressors until the object finishes 
its waypoints. 


Attack/Ignore 


Choose whether other objects can attack or just ignore the object. This only 
affects computer-controlled enemies and in no way limits the player from 
attacking the object. 


This option is basically a cheat for the mission designer — you can ensure 
that computer-controlled objects do not do the player’s work by destroying 
mission objectives. 


Delay 


Allows you to force an object to wait before beginning its mission. Note that 
this only applies to objects on the ground. Aircraft at any altitude above ground 
level are moving and cannot be “delayed.” 


Show/Hide 


Lets you determine whether or not the player will see the object on the briefing 
map. This allows you to determine how current the player’s intelligence data 
is. Does he know where enemy SAM sites are located, or are air defenses 
unknown? 


Creating Wings 


Aircraft can operate together in groups called wings. A wing allows you to 
assign a single mission objective to up to six aircraft. 


To create a wing, add a number of aircraft to the map. Click on one of the 
aircraft to select it. From the Waypoint Menu, highlight Add To Wing. A 
submenu appears listing six wing “colors.” 


Highlight the color of the new wing and release the mouse button. Add the rest 
of the aircraft to the wing in the same manner. Now when you give orders to 
one aircraft in the wing, the other aircraft receive those orders, too. 


Stationing Aircraft at Airbases & on Carriers 


Single aircraft and wings can be stationed at airbases or on carriers. Grounded 
aircraft do not appear on enemy radar until they take to the air. 


To set an aircraft or wing at an airbase or carrier, click on the aircraft icon. 
Drag the icon and place it over the runway or carrier icon. Point at the altitude 
text button and left-click until the altitude reads ground level. 


The aircraft represented by the icon are automatically deployed to the airbase 


or carrier. 


Delaying Take Off 


Unless directed to wait, grounded aircraft will immediately take off from their 
base when the mission begins. You can, however, direct any aircraft to “wait” 
before beginning their mission. As a mission designer, this gives you the 
option of keeping enemy air units completely hidden until the you want them 
to begin their mission. 


To delay take off, click on the grounded unit to select it. Point at the text 
button and click until the appropriate delay time appears. 


Setting Waypoints & Mission Objectives 


Waypoints allow you to specify a series of actions for a given unit — where it 
will go and what its response to enemy units will be. You can assign 
waypoints to any object that can logically move: aircraft, ships, and ground 
units. 


Adding Waypoints 


Select the unit you wish to assign waypoints. Select Add from the Waypoint 
Menu or press A. A waypoint marker appears on the map: 


Waypoint Formation 


The formation, spacing, stacking, and control text buttons apply only to wings. 
These allow you to control how the aircraft in the wing fly to their waypoint. 


The various formation and stacking options available to you are illustrated 
below: 


Waypoint Assignment 


You can set waypoint objectives by clicking on the reaction text buttons, or by 
supplying the object with a preset waypoint assignments. 


Preset waypoint assignments are as follows: 


Assignment 
Task Performed 


Normal Flight 
Executes as defined by subsequent text boxes. 


MIGCAP 
Seek out and destroy enemy aircraft near specified 
waypoint 


BARCAP 
Engage any aircraft attempting to cross the patrol 
zone 


CAS 
Close Air Support, engage enemy ground targets 


Evade 
Avoid all contact with the enemy. Useful for 
bypassing patrols on ingress or for AWACS aircraft. 


Escort 
Fly with and protect the designated units. 


Search and Destroy 
Fly to the point and look for targets of any type. 


Attack 
Attack a specific, named target. 


Wild Weasel 
Attack enemy air defenses. 


Saving Custom Missions 


Once you’ve set up a mission, select Save Mission... from the File Menu. 
Type in a name for the mission, and then click OK or press enter. The file will 
appear in your USNF directory with a “.mt” extension attached to it. 


Playing Custom Missions 


There are two ways you can test custom missions that you’ve created. You 
can load them into the Pro Mission Creator and select the OK button. This 
takes you directly to the mission, where you can tune the mission to make it 
more challenging or playable. Alternately, you can load the mission from the 
Fly Single Mission Screen. 


Pro Mission Creator Menu Bar 


File Menu 


The File Menu allows you to save missions to file and to retrieve previously 
saved missions. 


Option 
Key 
Equivalent 
Description 


New mission 
Ctrl-N 
Erase all added objects and 
reset the map to its default 
state. 


Load mission 
L 
Load a previously saved 
mission. Click to highlight the 
mission you want to load, and 
then click on the OK button. 


Save mission 
S 
Save current mission. You will 
be prompted to enter a 
filename. Type the name of 
your mission and click on the 
OK button. 


View Menu 


The View Menu lets you control your view of the map. 


Option 
Key 
Equivalent 
Description 


Scroll left 
cursor left 
Scroll map view left. 


Scroll right 
cursor right 
Scroll map view right. 


Scroll up 
cursor up 
Scroll map view up. 


Scroll down 
cursor down 
Scroll map view down. 


Center map at 
cursor 
N 
Center the map display on the 
current cursor position. 


Center map at 
selection 
B 
Center the map display on the 
currently selected object. 


Zoom in 
plus (+) 
Zoom in on map. 


Zoom out 
minus (-) 
Zoom out on map. 


Smart zoom 
When activated, you zoom in 
and out on the currently 
selected object. If no object 
has been selected, you zoom 
in and out on the center of the 
map. 


World Menu 


The World Menu controls map and mission parameters which apply to the 
entire scenario. The World Menu also allows the mission designer to decide 
whether the player has access to various game shell screens. 


Option 
Description 


Set map 
Choose a map for your scenario. In the original U.S. 
Navy Fighters, this includes the UKR map. 


Set weather 
Choose weather and time of day effects for the 
mission: Clear, Cloud Cover, Fog, Sunrise, Sunset, 
Night. 


Set friendly & 
enemy sides 
This allows you to choose which nations ally 
themselves. Each mission has two generic sides, 
friendly and enemy. Although you may fly for either 
side, friendly forces are always shown in blue while 
enemy forces are shown in red. 


Each country has a lighted button that can be turned 
on and off. Clicking the button so that its unlit allies 
the selected country with the friendly, or blue, forces. 
Clicking the button to ON allies the selected country 
with enemy, or red, forces. 


In combat, “allied nations” will not attack each other. 


Blue units will only attack red units while red units 
will only attack blue units. 


Set screens 
Determine what screens the player has access to 
when executing this mission. You may restrict or 
grant access to the Briefing Paper, Briefing Map, 
Select Plane, or Arm Plane screens. For example, 
denying access to the Select Plane screen forces the 
player to fly the mission with the aircraft you 
specified. Granting access to the Arm Plane screen 
allows the user to arm the plane according to their 
tastes rather than using the default weapon load. 


Friendly pilot 
skills 
Specify the default skill level for friendly pilots by 
selecting from the sub-menu. 


Friendly SAM 
skills 
Specify the default skill level for friendly air defenses 
by selecting from the sub-menu. 


Enemy pilot skills 
Specify the default skill level for enemy pilots by 
selecting from the sub-menu. 


Enemy SAM skills 
Specify the default skill level for enemy air defenses 
by selecting from the sub-menu. 


Object Menu 


The Object Menu controls creation and high-level control of individual units and 
wings. A “wing” is defined as a group of up to 5 aircraft operating together. The 
Pro Mission Creator allows up to 8 wings, each specified by a separate color. 


Option 
Key 
Equivalent 
Description 


Add 
Insert 
Adds units to the mission. A 
separate menu will appear 
allowing you to choose which 
unit to add. You may add only 
one item at a time. New units 
are not assigned to any wing. 


Duplicate 
U 
Creates an exact duplicate of 
the last unit created. 


Delete 
Delete 
Deletes the selected unit. 
Click on the unit, then select 
Delete. 


Add to wing 
Add an aircraft to a wing. 
Wings are groups of aircraft 
acting on a single purpose. 
The aircraft must already be 
selected in order to add it to a 


wing. 


Remove from 
wing 
Remove the specified aircraft 
(appearing at the right of the 
map) from the currently 
selected wing. 


Make wingleader 
Make the specified aircraft 
(appearing at the right of the 
map) the leader of the wing. All 
other aircraft in the wing follow 
the actions of the wingleader. 


Waypoint Menu 


The waypoint menu controls movement of units and wings, as well as what 
actions those units and wings execute. The waypoint menu lets you create 
and delete waypoints as well as create “patrols” by looping waypoints. 


Waypoint Menu 


Option 
Key 
Equivalent 
Description 


Add 
A 
Add a waypoint for a selected 
aircraft, wing, ship, or vehicle. 
The object must be selected 
before you can assign it a 
waypoint. 


Delete 
D 
Delete a waypoint for a 
selected aircraft, wing, ship, or 
vehicle. The waypoint must be 
selected before you can delete 
it. 


Create loop 
C 
Create a loop between two 
waypoints. Select the 
beginning waypoint, select 
Create loop, and then click on 
the end waypoint. The aircraft 
will travel from the initial 
waypoint, along any 
intermediary waypoints, until it 
reaches the end waypoint. It 
will repeat this process 
indefinitely. 


Delete loop 
E 
Deletes a loop between two 
waypoints. Select the end 
waypoint, and then select 
Delete loop. 


Select prev. 
[ 
Select the previous waypoint 


waypoint 
for the selected object. 


Select next 
waypoint 
] 
Select the next waypoint for 
the selected object. 


Show Menu 


The Show Menu controls what classes of objects are currently displayed on 
the map. Complex missions may require “de-cluttering” the screen by 
disabling some frequently-appearing units, such as AAA and SAM sites. This 
menu allows you to hide classes of objects while building a mission. 


When a check mark to appears next to an object class, objects from that 
class are displayed on the map. To hide a class, select it from the menu; the 
check mark disappears and objects from that class are no longer shown on 
the map. The units still exist in their proper positions, they’re simply not 
displayed. 


Chapter 8 


TECHNICAL DATA 


NATO Aircraft 


Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 57 ft 6 in 


LENGTH: 53 ft 4 in 


HEIGHT: 14 ft 8 in 


DURABILITY: High 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 6 


MIN G-LOAD: -3 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: High 


Fuel 


FUEL: 10,700 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 2 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 30 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 30 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Average 


Gun 


1 x 30mm gun (1,000 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AIM-9 Sidewinder AAM (2) 


Air-to-Surface 


AGM-65 Maverick ASM (8) 


Grumman A-6E Intruder 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 53 ft 


LENGTH: 54 ft 9 in 


HEIGHT: 16 ft 2 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 4 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 15,470 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 2 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 50 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 25 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


None 


Air-to-Air 


None 


Air-to-Surface 


AGM-65 Maverick ASM (12) 


Vought A-7E Corsair II 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 38 ft 9 in 


LENGTH: 46 ft 1.5 in 


HEIGHT: 16 ft 0.75 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 6 


MIN G-LOAD: -3 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: High 


Fuel 


FUEL: 9,900 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 2 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 75 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 50 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Average 


Gun 


1 x 20mm gun (1,000 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AIM-9 Sidewinder AAM (2) 


Air-to-Surface 


AGM-65 Maverick ASM (4) 


Mark 82 GP bomb (2) 


McDonnell Douglas AV-8B Harrier II 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 30 ft 4 in 


LENGTH: 46 ft 4 in 


HEIGHT: 11 ft 8 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 7 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: High 


Fuel 


FUEL: 7,759 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 4 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 50 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 30 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 25mm gun pod (300 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AIM-9 Sidewinder AAM (2) 


Air-to-Surface 


AGM-65 Maverick ASM (6) 


Boeing B-52G Stratofortress 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 185 ft 


LENGTH: 160 ft 10.9 in 


HEIGHT: 40 ft 8 in 


DURABILITY: High 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 3 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 200,000 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 11 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 150 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 150 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 20mm gun in tail of airplane 


Air-to-Air 


None 


Air-to-Surface 


AGM-84E SLAM (12) 


Lockheed C-130H Hercules 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 132 ft 7 in 


LENGTH: 112 ft 9 in 


HEIGHT: 38 ft 3 in 


DURABILITY: High 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 3 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 45,012 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 1 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: N/A 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: N/A 


LOOKDOWN: N/A 


Grumman E-2C Hawkeye 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 80 ft 7 in 


LENGTH: 57 ft 6.75 in 


HEIGHT: 18 ft 3.75 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 3 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 12,400 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 1 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 200 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 200 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Boeing E-3 Sentry 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 145 ft 9 in 


LENGTH: 152 ft 11 in 


HEIGHT: 41 ft 9 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 3 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 157,839 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 5 lbs/sec 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 200 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 200 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Boeing E-8A JSTARS 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 94 ft 9 in 


LENGTH: 109 ft 7 in 


HEIGHT: 36 ft 6 in 


DURABILITY: High 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 3 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 157,839 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 5 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 300 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 300 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Grumman EA-6B Prowler 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 53 ft 


LENGTH: 59 ft 10 in 


HEIGHT: 16 ft 3 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 4 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 15,470 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 2 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 50 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 25 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Lockheed F-104 Starfighter 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 21 ft 11 in 


LENGTH: 54 ft 9 in 


HEIGHT: 13 ft 6 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 5 


MIN G-LOAD: -3 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Low 


Fuel 


FUEL: 10,000 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 7 lbs/sec (military thrust), 26 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 50 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 25 


LOOKDOWN: Inferior 


Guns 


1 x 20mm cannon (720 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AIM-7 Sparrow AAM (4) 


AIM-9 Sidewinder AAM (2) 


Air-to-Surface 


None 


Grumman F-14B Tomcat 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 38 ft 2.5 in (swept); 33 ft 


3.5 in (overswept) 


LENGTH: 62 ft 8 in 


HEIGHT: 16 ft 


DURABILITY: High 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 9 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Low 


Fuel 


FUEL: 15,741 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 6 lbs/sec (military thrust), 21 lbs/sec (afterburners) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 190 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 100 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Average 


Gun 


1 x 20mm gun (675 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AIM-9 Sidewinder AAM (2) 


AIM-54 Phoenix AAM (4) 


AIM-120 AMRAAM (4) 


Air-to-Surface 


None 


McDonnell Douglas F-15C Eagle 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 49 ft 9.75 in 


LENGTH: 63 ft 9 in 


HEIGHT: 18 ft 7.5 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 9 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Low 


Fuel 


FUEL: 13,662 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 7 lbs/sec (military thrust), 24 lbs/sec (afterburners) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 150 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 75 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Average 


Gun 


1 x 20mm gun (940 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AIM-9 Sidewinder AAM (4) 


AIM-120 AMRAAM (4) 


Air-to-Surface 


None 


McDonnell Douglas F/A-18D Hornet 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 37 ft 6 in 


LENGTH: 56 ft 


HEIGHT: 15 ft 3.5 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 9 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Medium 


Fuel 


FUEL: 11,220 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 4 lbs/sec (military thrust), 16 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 90 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 45 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 20mm gun (570 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AIM-9 Sidewinder AAM (2) 


AIM-120 AMRAAM (2) 


Air-to-Surface 


AGM-65 Maverick ASM (8) 


McDonnell Douglas F/A-18C Hornet 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 37 ft 6 in 


LENGTH: 56 ft 


HEIGHT: 15 ft 3.5 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 9 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Medium 


Fuel 


FUEL: 11,220 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 4 lbs/sec (military thrust), 16 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 90 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 45 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 20mm gun (570 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AIM-9 Sidewinder AAM (2) 


AIM-120 AMRAAM (8) 


Air-to-Surface 


AGM-65 Maverick ASM (2) 


Lockheed F-22 Lightning II 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 44 ft 6 in 


LENGTH: 62 ft 1 in 


HEIGHT: 16 ft 5 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 9 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Low 


Fuel 


FUEL: 13,662 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 10 lbs/sec (military thrust), 35 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 150 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 150 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 20mm gun (750 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AIM-9 Sidewinder AAM (4) 


AIM-120 AMRAAM (4) 


Air-to-Surface 


AGM-65 Maverick ASM (4) 


Boeing KC-135A Stratotanker 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: Unavailable 


LENGTH: Unavailable 


HEIGHT: Unavailable 


DURABILITY: High 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 3 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 157,839 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 5 lbs/sec 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: N/A 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: N/A 


LOOKDOWN: N/A 


Sikorsky S-60B Seahawk 


Structure 


ROTOR: 53 ft 8 in 


LENGTH: 64 ft 10 in 


HEIGHT: 16 ft 10 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 3 


MIN G-LOAD: -1 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 2,376 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 1 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: N/A 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: N/A 


LOOKDOWN: N/A 


Russian Aircraft 


Antonov An-74 ‘Coaler’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 84 ft 9 in 


LENGTH: 87 ft 2.25 in 


HEIGHT: 27 ft 0.25 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 3 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 28,550 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 2 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: N/A 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: N/A 


LOOKDOWN: N/A 


Ilyushin Il-96-300 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 197 ft 2.5 in 


LENGTH: 181 ft 7.25 in 


HEIGHT: 57 ft 7.75 in 


DURABILITY: High 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 3 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 253,311 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 8 lbs/sec (100% throttle) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: N/A 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: N/A 


LOOKDOWN: N/A 


Kamov Ka-50 ‘Hokum’ 


Structure 


ROTOR: 47 ft 7 in 


LENGTH: 52 ft 6 in 


HEIGHT: Unknown 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 4 


MIN G-LOAD: -1 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 2,000 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 1 lbs/sec 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 10 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 10 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 30mm gun (1000 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AA-8 ‘Aphid’ AAM (2) 


Air-to-Surface 


AT-12 ‘Swinger’ ASM (10) 


Mil Mi-24 ‘Hind-D’ 


Structure 


ROTOR: 55 ft 9 in 


LENGTH: 57 ft 5 in 


HEIGHT: 21 ft 4 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 3 


MIN G-LOAD: -1 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 3,307 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 1 lbs/sec 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: None 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: None 


LOOKDOWN: N/A 


Gun 


12.5mm gun (750 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


None 


Air-to-Surface 


AT-12 ‘Swinger’ ASM 


Mikoyan/Gurevich MiG-21 ‘Fishbed-J’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 23 ft 5.5 in 


LENGTH: 51 ft 8.5 in 


HEIGHT: 14 ft 9 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 8 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Medium 


Fuel 


FUEL: 4,534 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 2 lbs/sec (military thrust), 7 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 18 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 9 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Inferior 


Gun 


1 x 23mm gun (200 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AA-2 ‘Atoll’ (4) 


Air-to-Surface 


None 


Mikoyan/Gurevich MiG-27 ‘Flogger-J’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 45 ft 9 in 


LENGTH: 52 ft 6 in 


HEIGHT: 18 ft 10.25 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 8 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Medium 


Fuel 


FUEL: 10,000 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 3 lbs/sec (military thrust), 13 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 43 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 34 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Inferior 


Gun 


1 x 30mm gun (200 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AA-2 ‘Atoll’ (2) 


Air-to-Surface 


AS-7 ‘Kerry’ (4) 


Mikoyan/Gurevich MiG-29 ‘Fulcrum-C’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 37 ft 8.75 in 


LENGTH: 56 ft 5 in 


HEIGHT: 14 ft 5.25 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 8 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Medium 


Fuel 


FUEL: 13,000 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 4 lbs/sec (military thrust), 18 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 62 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 43 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 30mm gun (150 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AA-8 ‘Aphid’ (6) 


Air-to-Surface 


None 


Mikoyan/Gurevich MiG-31 ‘Foxhound-A’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 45 ft 11.25 in 


LENGTH: 70 ft 6.5 in 


HEIGHT: 20 ft 0.25 in 


DURABILITY: High 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 4 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Very Low 


Fuel 


FUEL: 30,865 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 7 lbs/sec (military thrust), 24 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 124 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 75 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Average 


Gun 


1 x 30mm gun (260 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AA-8 ‘Aphid’ (2) 


AA-9 ‘Amos’ (4) 


Air-to-Surface 


None 


Sukhoi Su-24 ‘Fencer-D’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 57 ft 5 in 


LENGTH: 69 ft 10 in 


HEIGHT: 19 ft 8.25 in 


DURABILITY: High 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 6 


MIN G-LOAD: -3 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 22,664 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 7 lbs/sec (military thrust), 25 (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 50 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 35 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 23mm gun (200 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


None 


Air-to-Surface 


AS-14 ‘Kedge’ (4) 


Sukhoi Su-27 ‘Flanker-B’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 48 ft 2.75 in 


LENGTH: 70 ft 10.5 in 


HEIGHT: 18 ft 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 9 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Low 


Fuel 


FUEL: 22,000 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 8 lbs/sec (military thrust), 30 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 150 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 115 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 30mm gun (150) 


Air-to-Air 


AA-11 ‘Archer’ (2) 


AA-12 ‘Amraamski’ (4) 


Air-to-Surface 


None 


Sukhoi Su-33 ‘Flanker-D’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 48 ft 2.75 in 


LENGTH: 70 ft 10.5 in 


HEIGHT: 18 ft 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 9 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Low 


Fuel 


FUEL: 22,000 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 8 lbs/sec (military thrust), 30 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 150 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 115 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 30mm gun (150 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AA-11 ‘Archer’ (2) 


AA-12 ‘Amraamski’ (4) 


Air-to-Surface 


None 


Sukhoi Su-34 ‘Flanker’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 48 ft 2.75 in 


LENGTH: 70 ft 10.5 in 


HEIGHT: 18 ft 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 9 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Low 


Fuel 


FUEL: 20,000 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 8 lbs/sec (military thrust), 30 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 150 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 115 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 30mm gun (150 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AA-11 ‘Archer’ (2) 


Air-to-Surface 


AS-14 ‘Kedge’ ASM (4) 


Sukhoi Su-37 ‘Flounder-A’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 38 ft 8.5 in 


LENGTH: 57 ft 5 in 


HEIGHT: Unknown 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 9 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Low 


Fuel 


FUEL: 20,000 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 4 lbs/sec (military thrust), 16 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 62 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 43 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


1 x 30mm gun (200 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AA-11 ‘Archer’ AAM (2) 


Air-to-Surface 


AS-14 ‘Kedge’ ASM (4) 


Tupolev Tu-160 ‘Blackjack’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 182 ft 9 in (unswept), 116 ft 9.75 in (swept) 


LENGTH: 177 ft 6 in 


HEIGHT: 43 ft 0 in 


DURABILITY: High 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 5 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 368,000 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 32 lbs/sec (military thrust), 116 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 150 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 150 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


None 


Air-to-Air 


None 


Air-to-Surface 


AS-16 ‘Kickback’ (8) ASM 


Tupolev Tu-26 ‘Backfire-C’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 112 ft 6.5 in (unswept), 76 ft 9.25 in (swept) 


LENGTH: 129 ft 11 in 


HEIGHT: 35 ft 5.25 in 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 4 


MIN G-LOAD: -2 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 110,230 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 12 lbs/sec (military thrust), 44 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 100 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 100 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Gun 


None 


Air-to-Air 


None 


Air-to-Surface 


AS-16 ‘Kickback’ ASM (6) 


Tupolev Tu-95 ‘Bear-D’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 167 ft 8 in 


LENGTH: 162 ft 5 in 


HEIGHT: 39 ft 9 in 


DURABILITY: High 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 3 


MIN G-LOAD: -1 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: N/A 


Fuel 


FUEL: 100,000 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 4 lbs/sec (military thrust) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 150 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 150 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


Guns 


3 x 23mm guns 


Air-to-Air 


None 


Air-to-Surface 


AS-16 ‘Kickback’ ASM (6) 


Yakovlev Yak-141 ‘Freestyle’ 


Structure 


WINGSPAN: 33 ft 1.75 in 


LENGTH: 19 ft 4.25 in 


HEIGHT: 60 ft 


DURABILITY: Medium 


Performance 


MAX G-LOAD: 7 


MIN G-LOAD: -4 


SUSTAINED G PERFORMANCE: Low 


Fuel 


FUEL: 9,700 lbs 


FUEL CONSUMPTION: 4 lbs/sec (military thrust), 17 lbs/sec (afterburner) 


Systems 


RADAR SEARCH RANGE: 40 nm 


RADAR TRACK RANGE: 20 nm 


LOOKDOWN: Average 


Gun 


1 x 30mm gun (1000 rounds) 


Air-to-Air 


AA-10 ‘Alamo’ (2) 


AA-11 ‘Archer’ (2) 


Air-to-Surface 


None 


NATO Air-to-Air Missiles 


AIM-7 Sparrow 


TYPE: Medium-Range SARH Missile 


WEIGHT: 505 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 2,400 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0.5 - 19.7 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: Yes 


LOOKDOWN: Poor 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:35% 


WARHEAD: 39 kg 


LETHALITY: High 


AIM-9B Sidewinder 


TYPE: Short-Range IR-Seeking Missile 


WEIGHT: 170 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 1,700 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0 - 3.9 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: No 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:65% 


WARHEAD: 5 kg 


LETHALITY: Low 


AIM-9M Sidewinder 


TYPE: Short-Range IR-Seeking Missile 


WEIGHT: 190 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 1,800 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0 - 3.9 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: No 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:85% 


WARHEAD: 10 kg 


LETHALITY: Medium 


AIM-54C Phoenix 


TYPE: Long-Range Active Radar Missile 


WEIGHT: 975 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 3,200 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0.1 - 148 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: Yes 


LOOKDOWN: Average 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:75% 


WARHEAD: 60 kg 


LETHALITY: High 


AIM-120 AMRAAM 


TYPE: Medium-Range Active Radar Missile 


WEIGHT: 345 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 2,600 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0 - 24.6 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: Yes 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:75% 


WARHEAD: 22 kg 


LETHALITY: High 


Russian Air-to-Air Missiles 


AA-2 Atoll 


TYPE: Short-Range IR-Seeking Missile 


WEIGHT: 165 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 1,700 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0 - 1.4 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: No 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:35% 


WARHEAD: 11 kg 


LETHALITY: Medium 


AA-6 Acrid 


TYPE: Medium-Range SARH Missile 


WEIGHT: 1,010 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 2,800 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0 - 14.8 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: Yes 


LOOKDOWN: Poor 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:35% 


WARHEAD: 70 kg 


LETHALITY: High 


AA-8 Aphid 


TYPE: Short-Range IR-Seeking Missile 


WEIGHT: 145 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 2,100 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0 - 1.4 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: No 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:50% 


WARHEAD: 6 kg 


LETHALITY: Low 


AA-9 Amos 


TYPE: Medium-Range Active Radar Missile 


WEIGHT: 1,080 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 2,500 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0 - 41 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: Yes 


LOOKDOWN: Poor 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:50% 


WARHEAD: 47 kg 


LETHALITY: High 


AA-10 Alamo 


TYPE: Medium-Range SARH Missile 


WEIGHT: 560 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 2,500 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0 - 19.7 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: Yes 


LOOKDOWN: Poor 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:50% 


WARHEAD: 39 kg 


LETHALITY: High 


AA-11 Archer 


TYPE: Medium-Range IR-Seeking Missile 


WEIGHT: 230 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 1,800 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0 - 9.8 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: No 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:75% 


WARHEAD: 8 kg 


LETHALITY: Low 


AA-12 “AMRAAMSKI” 


TYPE: Medium-Range Active Radar Missile 


WEIGHT: 385 lbs 


MAX SPEED: 2,100 kts 


MIN/MAX RANGE: 0 - 24.6 nm 


ALL-ASPECT: Yes 


LOOKDOWN: Superior 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY:75% 


WARHEAD: 30 kg 


LETHALITY: High 


Russian Air-to-Surface Missiles 


AS-7 Kerry 


TYPE: Short-Range Radar-Guided Missile 


WEIGHT: 631 lbs 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 4.9 nm 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY: 80% 


WARHEAD: 110 kg 


AS-14 Kedge 


TYPE: Medium-Range Laser-Guided Missile 


WEIGHT: 1,495 lbs 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 6.5 nm 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY: 80% 


WARHEAD: 330 kg 


AS-16 Kickback 


TYPE: Medium-Range Radar-Guided Missile 


WEIGHT: 2,640 lbs 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 6.5 nm 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY: 80% 


WARHEAD: 330 kg 


AT-2 Swatter 


TYPE: Short-Range Command-Guided Missile 


WEIGHT: 2,640 lbs 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 2.9 nm 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY: 50% 


WARHEAD: 330 kg 


AT-12 Swinger 


TYPE: Short-Range Laser-Guided Missile 


WEIGHT: 132 lbs 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 4.2 nm 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY: 80% 


WARHEAD: 8 kg 


NATO Air-to-Surface Missiles 


AGM-65G Maverick 


TYPE: Medium-Range IR-Seeking Missile 


WEIGHT: 675 lbs 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 9.8 nm 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY: 90% 


WARHEAD: 136 kg 


AGM-88 HARM 


TYPE: Medium-Range Highspeed Anti-Radiation Missile 


WEIGHT: 795 lbs 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 12.3 nm 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY: 90% 


WARHEAD: 66 kg 


AGM-84A Harpoon 


TYPE: Long-Range Active Radar Missile 


WEIGHT: 1,165 lbs 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 59 nm 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY: 90% 


WARHEAD: 220 kg 


AGM-84E SLAM 


TYPE: Long-Range Active Radar Missile 


WEIGHT: 1,380 lbs 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 49 nm 


MAX HIT PROBABILITY: 90% 


WARHEAD: 220 kg 


NATO Surface-to-Air Missiles 


ASROC 


TYPE: Low to Medium Altitude SARH Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 12.3 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 1,000 - 30,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Medium 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: Unknown 


LETHALITY: High 


AIM-7 Sea Sparrow 


TYPE: Low to Medium Altitude SARH Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 12.3 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 1,000 - 30,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Medium 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 39 kg 


LETHALITY: High 


Russian Surface-to-Air Missiles 


SA-3 Goa 


TYPE: Low to Medium Altitude SARH Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 1.2 - 8.9 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 5,000 - 36,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 60 kg 


LETHALITY: High 


SA-6 Gainful 


TYPE: Low to Medium Altitude SARH Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 1.4 - 12.3 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 2,000 - 30,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 56 kg 


LETHALITY: Medium 


SA-7 Grail 


TYPE: Low Altitude Manportable IR-Seeking Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 1.4 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 0 - 6,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 2 kg 


LETHALITY: Low 


SA-9 Gaskin 


TYPE: Low Altitude IR-Seeking Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 1.4 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 0 - 6,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 30 kg 


LETHALITY: Low 


SA-13 Gopher 


TYPE: Low Altitude IR-Seeking Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0.25 - 2.4 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 100 - 10,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 2.7 kg 


LETHALITY: Low 


SA-14 Gremlin 


TYPE: Low Altitude Manportable IR-Seeking Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 2.4 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 0 - 15,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Superior 


WARHEAD: 2 kg 


LETHALITY: Low 


SA-15 Gauntlet 


TYPE: Low to Medium Altitude SARH Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0.1 - 5.9 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 100 - 18,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Medium 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 15 kg 


LETHALITY: Medium 


SA-16 Gimlet 


TYPE: Low Altitude Manportable IR-Seeking Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 2.4 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 0 - 15,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Superior 


WARHEAD: 2 kg 


LETHALITY: Low 


SA-19 


TYPE: Low Altitude SARH Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 3.9 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 0 - 9,500 ft 


ACCURACY: High 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 10 kg 


LETHALITY: Low 


SA-N-3 Goblet 


TYPE: Medium to High Altitude SARH Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0.8 - 16.5 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 1,000 - 75,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 80 kg 


LETHALITY: High 


SA-N-4 Gecko 


TYPE: Low Altitude SARH Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0.6 - 5.7 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 500 - 15,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 40 kg 


LETHALITY: High 


SA-N-5 Grail 


TYPE: Low Altitude IR-Seeking Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 1.4 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 0 - 6,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 2 kg 


LETHALITY: Low 


SA-N-7 Gadfly 


TYPE: Low to Medium Altitude SARH Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0.2 - 9.8 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 500 - 45,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 70 kg 


LETHALITY: Medium 


SA-N-8 Gremlin 


TYPE: Low Altitude IR-Seeking Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0 - 2.5 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 0 - 10,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Low 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Superior 


WARHEAD: 2 kg 


LETHALITY: Low 


SA-N-9 Klinok 


TYPE: Low Altitude IR-Seeking Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0.2 - 5.9 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 0 - 18,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Medium 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 15 kg 


LETHALITY: Medium 


SA-N-11 Gremlin 


TYPE: Low to Medium Altitude SARH Missile 


EFFECTIVE RANGE: 0.2 - 3.9 nm 


EFFECTIVE ALTITUDE: 100 - 24,000 ft 


ACCURACY: Medium 


HOMING INTELLIGENCE: Average 


WARHEAD: 10 kg 


LETHALITY: Medium 


Bombs 


Mk 82 


TYPE: General Purpose Glide Bomb 


WEIGHT: 500 lbs 


WARHEAD: 87 kg 


Mk 84 


TYPE: General Purpose Glide Bomb 


WEIGHT: 2,000 lbs 


WARHEAD: 348 kg 


GBU-10 Paveway 


TYPE: Laser-Guided Glide Bomb 


WEIGHT: 2,000 lbs 


WARHEAD: 348 kg 


